[Amit Varma]: It is said that shared experiences can bring us closer. By the same token, can shared suffering
[Amit Varma]: make us more empathetic? There has never been a period of time in our history when so many
[Amit Varma]: have suffered together. At some point in the last few months, and perhaps in just the last
[Amit Varma]: few weeks, every family in India has known of loss or grief or anger in some form or
[Amit Varma]: the other. Every day, anodyne phrases that one just said reflexively have taken on deeper
[Amit Varma]: meaning. These days, when I say, how are you? Or is everything okay? Or take care? I mean
[Amit Varma]: those words. There is so much bad news around me that I should be numb by now. But I am
[Amit Varma]: the opposite of numb. Every loss I hear about makes all other losses blaze within me. And
[Amit Varma]: I see that most people I speak to feel the same. We are alive to the pain of other people.
[Amit Varma]: We are not islands anymore. And here I must ask the question, what will we do with this
[Amit Varma]: outpouring of empathy? Instead of just feeling bad for others, is there any way that we can
[Unknown]: help them?
[Unknown]: Welcome to the scene and the unseen, our weekly podcast on economics, politics and behavioral
[Unknown]: science. Please welcome your host, Amit Verma.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome to the scene and the unseen. My guest today is one of my favorite thinkers in this
[Amit Varma]: country, Ashwin Mahesh. But Ashwin is not just a thinker, he's also a doer. Listeners
[Amit Varma]: of the show will remember him from episode 160, where we spoke about participatory democracy.
[Amit Varma]: And Ashwin outlined the many different ways in which citizens can empower themselves by
[Amit Varma]: working with the state. He himself has been at the forefront of much civic activism and
[Amit Varma]: action and he kicked it into a new gear in this pandemic. There were immediate problems
[Amit Varma]: that needed to be addressed, people needing food, medicine, oxygen. And there were deeper
[Amit Varma]: problems behind them that Ashwin has already been working to solve for many years now.
[Amit Varma]: I spoke a few months ago with Ashwin's colleague in Mumbai, Ruben Mascarenhas, one of the founders
[Amit Varma]: of the Khana Chahiye movement that fed hungry people during the lockdown last year, especially
[Amit Varma]: the migrant workers abandoned by both their employers and the state. Ruben's been active
[Amit Varma]: helping people in Mumbai with medicines and beds during the second wave. And Ashwin's
[Amit Varma]: been organising that kind of relief work at scale, so much so that even governments have
[Amit Varma]: reached out to his network to get things done. I was delighted to have Ashwin on the show
[Amit Varma]: to chat about his experiences and learnings. And as it happens, there are also threads
[Amit Varma]: of a continuing discussion here. In my last wildly popular episode with Karthik Muralidharan
[Amit Varma]: on India's healthcare, you might have heard my scepticism about getting the state to do
[Amit Varma]: the few things it should do. To me, society will have to solve its own problems. We cannot
[Amit Varma]: rely on the dysfunctional state. Karthik argued with me then on the importance of working
[Amit Varma]: with the state and cited Ashwin's words from previous episodes to back up his argument.
[Amit Varma]: And in this episode, Ashwin carries that argument forward. I love the work both of them do.
[Amit Varma]: I think it's important. I hope many young people get inspired by them. But before we
[Amit Varma]: get to my conversation with Ashwin, let's take a quick commercial break.
[Amit Varma]: The Second Coming by William Butler Yeats
[Amit Varma]: Turning and turning in the widening jaya, the falcon cannot hear the falconer. Things
[Amit Varma]: fall apart, the centre cannot hold. Mere anarchy is loosed upon the world. The blood-drenched
[Amit Varma]: tide is loosed, and everywhere the ceremony of innocence is drowned. The best lack all
[Amit Varma]: conviction, while the worst are full of passionate intensity.
[Amit Varma]: This poem by Yeats could be about so many things. And most of all, it can be about revolution.
[Amit Varma]: The centre cannot hold, the people rise up. What was once taken for granted is now washed
[Amit Varma]: away. Revolutions, both good and bad, have always
[Amit Varma]: fascinated me. And if you feel that way as well, I have a recommendation for you. Head
[Amit Varma]: on over to the sponsors of this episode, The Great Courses Plus at thegreatcoursesplus.com
[Amit Varma]: and check out a course called The Great Revolutions of Modern History taught by Lynn Ann Hartnett.
[Amit Varma]: It consists of 24 online lectures dealing with subjects like nationalism, totalitarianism
[Amit Varma]: and democracy and gives you an in-depth look at the various revolutions in America, Russia,
[Amit Varma]: France, China and so on. There's lots to learn from this history, not just from the way events
[Amit Varma]: unfolded, not just from the ideas that inspired them, but also from what they reveal about
[Amit Varma]: both society and human nature. And this is just one of the many great courses on this
[Amit Varma]: aptly named site. The Great Courses Plus has a fantastic library of online courses from
[Amit Varma]: subjects ranging from music, math, cooking, history, political theory and much else. They
[Amit Varma]: also have an app where you can listen to the audio of these courses the same way you listen
[Amit Varma]: to podcasts. And it will cost you nothing. You get one month of unlimited free access
[Amit Varma]: if you use the following URL, thegreatcoursesplus.com slash unseen. That's right, unseen, thegreatcoursesplus.com
[Amit Varma]: slash unseen for one month of unlimited free access. Sign up now for free for a revolution
[Amit Varma]: of the mind.
[Amit Varma]: Ashwin, welcome to the scene and the unseen.
[Guest]: Amit, always good to be back with you.
[Amit Varma]: So you know, before we get down to the subject at hand, we spoke last three or four months
[Amit Varma]: ago. And at that point in time, I asked you how the pandemic was for you. And we almost
[Amit Varma]: spoke of it in the past tense, it felt like it was getting over and the worst is behind
[Amit Varma]: us. And now here we are. And these have been like incredibly difficult times for all of
[Amit Varma]: us in various different ways. I'll ask you the same question again, that I think I started
[Amit Varma]: that episode with, how have the last few months been for you?
[Guest]: It's hard to say, obviously, it goes up and down based on what is happening in any one
[Guest]: geography, right? I live in this city. So the experience of it is really what's happening
[Guest]: in this city. The rest of it is what you hear and read and things like that. And then the
[Guest]: second kind of experience is whether you yourself have had COVID or your family members have
[Guest]: had COVID. And therefore, it comes close to you and your friends have had COVID. And then
[Guest]: as the months go on and on, inevitably, someone, you know, has died. And clearly, that has
[Guest]: been a sad thing. It's sad when anyone dies. And it's sad when so many people die on such
[Guest]: a scale. But it's sad when someone you know, in a different way, you know what I mean?
[Guest]: Someone you know, personally, when they decide in a different way, not because you know them,
[Guest]: but because you know more about them. That's all it is. I really was sad about Sunil Jain's
[Guest]: death, for example, the other day, I think he was just one of those nice guys. And things
[Guest]: like that, some of my friends went through near miss experience, you know, when it came
[Guest]: very close. Some of my friends have had multiple family members who have died. There's no good
[Guest]: way to think about it. My wife and mother-in-law had COVID. And that was kind of an interesting
[Guest]: experience isolation, quarantine. Fortunately, they had a mild case of it. And I think, I
[Guest]: just, I feel like I already had COVID several times. So I haven't figured out that part.
[Guest]: There's no proper diagnosis of it by anybody yet. But just the way we went through the
[Guest]: last 15 months, there were many, many times when I told myself, this must be it. And I'm
[Guest]: sure all of us have that kind of experience as well. It's been sad, to tell you the truth.
[Guest]: It's also been hectic. Because as the thing started to get out of hand, you can't stand
[Guest]: and watch, you have to do something. And getting into it means that there's no getting into
[Guest]: it in a small way. I mean, if you get into it in a small way, every little bit helps,
[Guest]: I don't deny that. But from certain vantage points, there's no way of getting into it
[Guest]: in a small way. So I've sort of dived headfirst into it, knowing fully well that it was the
[Guest]: shallow end of the pool. For all of us, it is the shallow end of the pool. And diving
[Guest]: is the only way to get in, in some way. It is what it is. I know I say that a lot. But
[Guest]: it's tragic. It's sad. But it's necessary now to just get on with it, whatever is needed
[Guest]: for intervention. And at some level, in the last two weeks in particular, I've just clouded
[Guest]: out my mind, saying, I don't want to know anything else. I don't want to know the news.
[Guest]: I don't want to know even the things that I would normally follow. There's a certain
[Guest]: kind of silence even in the house. You know what I mean? Everybody is in WFH mode. The
[Guest]: kids are schooling from home, obviously. But there's still a kind of silence in the house.
[Guest]: It's the silence of getting on with doing what needs to be done, and just choosing and
[Guest]: not choosing not to be able to look at anything else in some way. It's sort of personal in
[Guest]: a way that I can't really explain. It's scary. It's, it's odd. But you know, these are not
[Guest]: normal times, clearly. But I think even emotionally, these are not normal times.
[Amit Varma]: You know, one way and you know, we'll explore different angles of this today, like how we
[Amit Varma]: look differently at the state or society or markets or whatever. But what has kind of
[Amit Varma]: struck me just thinking aloud is that people have been forced to look inwards a little
[Amit Varma]: bit more in a number of different facets. And I think aloud here, for example, for example,
[Amit Varma]: life and death, where we almost live under the illusion that we will live forever, almost
[Amit Varma]: an illusion of mortality at a rational level, we know we will die. But we behave as if you're
[Amit Varma]: going to live forever. And equally for our loved ones and the people around us, we behave
[Amit Varma]: as if they're going to be there till one day somebody is not and that's a shock, but you
[Amit Varma]: get over it, you get on with it. And for most of us, the frequency of that happening is
[Amit Varma]: low enough that we can cope that it just seems and a break from normalcy instead of normalcy
[Amit Varma]: itself. And I think that's one of the ways in which we which we have been forced to reexamine
[Amit Varma]: like I've heard people in their 30s discussing how they're going to make a will and all of
[Amit Varma]: that and these are not things that one normally thinks about, you know. Another aspect in
[Amit Varma]: which I think it has changed is in the way that we look at relationships, maybe relationships
[Amit Varma]: with the ones who are gone, maybe relationships with the ones who are still here, where you
[Amit Varma]: realize that you cannot take anything for granted. And of course, the pandemic throws
[Amit Varma]: families together because of the lockdown forcing them to sort of stick around. And
[Amit Varma]: you know, that can be unpleasant for some people, especially, you know, I keep hearing
[Amit Varma]: horror stories of women who are already in bad marriages, but it's okay, they don't have
[Amit Varma]: to spend so much time. And suddenly, you're at home with the other person and there's
[Amit Varma]: no escape, you have to face up to what's not good about that. And equally, there are many
[Amit Varma]: cases where you come to appreciate the other person so much more. For those of us who are
[Amit Varma]: fortunate, that's great. Another way is not just reexamining your relationship with other
[Amit Varma]: people, but your relationship with the world around you. You know, you kind of look a little
[Amit Varma]: closer at that. And by the world around you, I mean other people outside your immediate
[Amit Varma]: circles who you might not have noticed, you know, in your bubble, and you notice them
[Amit Varma]: a bit more. And then finally, your relationship with life where you question the things that
[Amit Varma]: you do. And you wonder about the reasons why you do them. Like so much of ambition seems
[Amit Varma]: so shallow and meaningless, because the question is, you know, even if I get that, so what?
[Amit Varma]: So then I think the larger questions come up of how do you live your life? How do you
[Amit Varma]: how do you find meaning and maximize what there is? Is any of this stuff that you've
[Amit Varma]: thought about as well?
[Guest]: I don't agree with the last part. I'm going to come back to that. But I also wanted to
[Guest]: say it's not only about the people that you know, it's even the people that you hear of.
[Guest]: For instance, you know, when I heard about your loss, I said, well, I don't know. I don't
[Guest]: know your father. I never knew him. But it's still your loss. And in some ways, even your
[Guest]: loss is my loss. You know what I mean? Because it's a kind of extended kinship. So it's not
[Guest]: always people that you know, you just hear about it. It's really sad. It's just one of
[Guest]: those things. But I also have come to the conclusion that if we are going to get through
[Guest]: this, I don't think in the short term, we can count on a different kind of behavior
[Guest]: from people to get through this. It's not going to happen again and again and again.
[Guest]: I think what you were saying, if I can put it in a more sort of, I won't call it layman,
[Guest]: in more direct language, you would think, in the face of a pandemic, will you change
[Guest]: your behavior? That's the question you're asking. And if that thing is not going to
[Guest]: make you change your behavior and rethink the meaning of life and the purpose of life
[Guest]: and all that, is that not enough to tip you over into a different way of thinking? And
[Guest]: I'm terrified that the answer is no. For most people, it's not. I'll give you an example.
[Guest]: During the last couple of weeks in particular, when it's really been a scramble to say, do
[Guest]: what you can, where you can, round up as many people to do what is possible, and we'll discuss
[Guest]: all that. It's not really a simple thing. But you know, especially in this last two
[Guest]: weeks when it's been such a scramble, you come into many, many conversations where you're
[Guest]: talking to people about the urgency of the intervention. I have a helicopter swirling
[Guest]: overhead.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, I can hear that. In a previous episode with Gautam Menon, there were ambulances outside
[Amit Varma]: which readers commented on. I think a helicopter is a less sad sound. No, no, no worries. Continue.
[Amit Varma]: I think it's fine.
[Guest]: So there have been many instances where you're sort of sitting in front of a person, you've
[Guest]: spent whatever time explaining the phenomenal urgency of what needs to be done today. And
[Guest]: you hear an answer, which is completely like, you know, they've not heard you at all. Right?
[Guest]: I mean, our executive committee meets every 15 days. We'll come back with a decision and
[Guest]: then you'll have an answer by the end of the month. I understand the processes that organizations
[Guest]: set up. But I'm just, you know, especially among people with the capacity to help, I
[Guest]: feel if they were not already the helpful type to begin with, I don't think they're
[Guest]: going to change pandemic or not. And that's actually the saddest part of it. And what
[Guest]: that tells me that the problem is not only the pandemic. The problem is that we have
[Guest]: allowed a certain kind of society to emerge in which even in the face of a pandemic, you
[Guest]: would not fundamentally do too much different. And I think whatever be the nature of the
[Guest]: response, you have to weave this knowledge into that response and build some kind of
[Guest]: a strategy for addressing that as well. I think it has become too easy to accept that
[Guest]: the world is screwed up. Other people are screwed up. Zamana karav hai. And everybody
[Guest]: else is part of that true, but it doesn't apply to me. And because zamana karav hai,
[Guest]: I really can't expect much, nor do I have to give anything into that. It's a kind of,
[Guest]: I think it's a dissonance of some kind, partly, but it's also, I think it's scary in different
[Guest]: ways. And as we go along, I think some of the anecdotes that I'll give you will give
[Guest]: you that sense of it. But I've seen people give extraordinary efforts in response to
[Guest]: the crisis around them. And the only thing I can say is that they were always heroes.
[Guest]: It's just more people are seeing them as heroes now, but even around them, if people were
[Guest]: not inclined to be heroic or even compassionate and do something to help, they're not going
[Guest]: to do that even in a pandemic, number one. But there is one group of people who are inclined
[Guest]: to do the right things for the right reasons. And for whatever reason, their connections
[Guest]: to doing things for the right reasons, for various outcomes, were never very good. So
[Guest]: they did what they could locally. If they had a domestic helper, they would pay them
[Guest]: a decent wage. If they knew somebody in the neighborhood who was on hard times, they would
[Guest]: help them out. They were inclined to help, but they were inclined to help at a very personal
[Guest]: level. And while that is genuinely a good thing, they had never sort of had the opportunity
[Guest]: or the capacity, I'm going to say, partly out of benefit of doubt, that they weren't
[Guest]: part of a larger system of helping. I think that's what it is, that if more people get
[Guest]: connected to a larger system of helping, because we are now trying to help in such a large
[Guest]: way, I would see that as the most powerful outcome. And that is also why we are being
[Guest]: very careful in a lot of the relief work that I'm sort of part of, at least, to say that
[Guest]: the system of people helping each other has to be at the heart of how we respond. It is
[Guest]: not a techno-managerial problem. It is a socio-political problem. And therefore, you have to respond
[Guest]: like it's a socio-political problem. You have to accept that we are like them and they are
[Guest]: like us, both ways. And I think that has to be in the middle of any response. And genuinely,
[Guest]: I feel a lot of people are inspired to take that extra step. They are inclined to be helpful.
[Guest]: They've done it in small ways in the past. But when they see the opportunity to do something
[Guest]: really big, and when it clicks in their mind that this is not just a linear extension of
[Guest]: what I've been doing, but really, it sort of helps me do more, and also sort of cements
[Guest]: in my mind an imagination of what I could be and how I should be living, they do make
[Guest]: that effort. But they were already inclined to do some good things in their own ways and
[Guest]: were doing it quietly. Those who are trapped, either individually or procedurally, in disinclination,
[Guest]: it's very hard to yank them out of that space. And therefore, one of the really important
[Guest]: things in any relief mission is to be able to spot that in the first five minutes.
[Guest]: I mean, if the guy is not going to do anything, you have to move on as quickly as possible.
[Guest]: And I should also say, for this reason, because it's so socio-political, and let's leave the
[Guest]: political, we'll come to the political, because it's so social as well, we sort of broke it
[Guest]: down into channels of social connection. There is one channel from the development sector
[Guest]: itself, people whose lives anyway reflect an ongoing commitment to helping others in
[Guest]: some way. Then there's a second set of people who have capacity to do something at an individual
[Guest]: level. I'm a professional in some company. Yes, I could talk to my boss about doing something
[Guest]: from the company, but I could also talk to the CSR team and do some other things. But
[Guest]: you know what? Before all that, right now, this minute, I can write a check for three
[Guest]: lakh rupees or whatever. There's a limit to that, but it's my capacity. I can decide right
[Guest]: now, I can do it right away. There's one set of people who are doing a very interesting
[Guest]: exercise of reaching out to others in that capacity and trying to build that network.
[Guest]: Leave the rest, just get on with this business of building this channel and just do it, talk
[Guest]: to others like you, who you think will do it. And many of these people are also in middle
[Guest]: management and other leadership roles in companies. So they can organize other kinds of support.
[Guest]: They can find tech volunteers. They can find, you know, some of them are in companies with
[Guest]: multiple offices in multiple cities. They can get people from different offices to be
[Guest]: part of what you are doing. They have some other capacity as a result of their professional
[Guest]: role play. And when they make the decision to do something themselves first, there's
[Guest]: a way in which it naturally extends to the ecosystem around them. So that's a second
[Guest]: channel. So you have the development channel and then you have the individual empathetic
[Guest]: professional channel. These are both really good if you ask me. And then you can always
[Guest]: build a crowdsourcing fundraising strategy on both of these channels fairly easily. It's
[Guest]: not that difficult. And for something like this, you don't have to explain the problem
[Guest]: very much. So it's manageable in that sense. Then there is the larger money, which is coming
[Guest]: from institutions in the form of, you know, organized support. It could be CSR money.
[Guest]: It could be, you know, procurement of some things that are needed. There's a lot of equipment
[Guest]: that needs to be procured. That is almost as slow or as quick as it has always been.
[Guest]: That's not moving any faster as far as I can tell. A lot of them will tell you that we
[Guest]: are doing something for COVID relief. And I think that's true also. I'm not going to
[Guest]: say that they are lying, but they're not doing it any faster than they would have done it
[Guest]: for any other development proposal that was sitting in front of you. The turnaround of
[Guest]: that is not anywhere close to what it could be, given the potential of that money to make
[Guest]: a difference. There is, however, one group within that, I wouldn't call it the professional
[Guest]: corporate sector, but there's another set of people who are owners of their businesses.
[Guest]: Or they are effectively, de facto, they are owners of their businesses and can therefore
[Guest]: make decisions on money a lot faster. These actually tend to be more industrial companies
[Guest]: rather than the service companies in some sense. Those guys tend to make decisions much
[Guest]: faster. And it's also a lot easier for them because they connect with this welfare of
[Guest]: my workers logic a little more directly. Some of their focus and preference is to help locally
[Guest]: where they are, which is understandable. But also some of them are saying, look, I don't
[Guest]: mind if you want to distribute some of my capacity more widely. So that's one part of
[Guest]: the professional industrial type thing. But the last one that I'll talk about in this
[Guest]: sequence is the larger donors who are essentially saying, we need to solve the procurement channels
[Guest]: here. We've got to figure out how to get 4,000 oxygen plants into the country or get them
[Guest]: built in the country. We have to figure out how to connect the zeolite supplies. We have
[Guest]: to figure out how to have enhanced vaccine production capacity inside the country. We
[Guest]: have to figure out how testing and genome sequencing can keep pace with what's actually
[Guest]: happening on the ground. And there are weaknesses in all of this. And the weaknesses are not
[Guest]: small. The weaknesses are like, the need is 100 and we are doing three or something like
[Guest]: that. It's like massive gaps. So the big donors are looking at that, but they're also trying
[Guest]: to figure out what is a spectrum of allocation that makes sense when you have a lot of money.
[Guest]: Because they realize that if you have a lot of money to, let's say, buy oxygen plants,
[Guest]: yes, it does fill one part of the need if you say, I'll commit to buying 500 oxygen
[Guest]: plants. But there are lots and lots of things around. You don't really have the technicians
[Guest]: in place to support 500 oxygen plants. So at the very least, you'd have to make investments
[Guest]: in a manpower strategy. Who can crack this manpower strategy? Then you start to ask around
[Guest]: and you say, OK, can Manish help? Can Urban Company help? You start to ask the questions
[Guest]: that are these complementary things. The good news about these large pools of capital for
[Guest]: this relief work is that they're reasonably well-connected across multiple sectors, partly
[Guest]: through the investment firms, but even otherwise. And there's a reasonable age group in which
[Guest]: a lot of them are. Some would say, I should really be saying a lot of us are. But in a
[Guest]: way, it's easier to say, look, we've all run companies. Therefore, we know A, B, C, D.
[Guest]: We know which kind of capacity connects to another kind of capacity. Lots of people have
[Guest]: raised money from investors. You know who those investors have also raised money from.
[Guest]: Tap those channels, figure out how to move the conversations along, and figure out what
[Guest]: the deployment strategy for money should be in a way that gives you some confidence in
[Guest]: what you know. But there are also important differences in that. Some are doing it this
[Guest]: way. Some are saying, in all of this, we have to work with the government. And therefore,
[Guest]: we'll go through with the government channels. Some are saying both things, that it's complicated
[Guest]: to work with the government channels. Also, there's a certain amount of worry that the
[Guest]: outcomes that you're pursuing may be compromised if you go through some of those channels.
[Guest]: And some are saying, look, yes, you have to sort of accept that because the channel is
[Guest]: large if you work with the government. And some inefficiency, some loss even, is acceptable
[Guest]: if you're going to work with that. It's better to get something done in scale than to look
[Guest]: for the ideal there. There are details, and there are details in these types of things.
[Guest]: So this is the other category. There's one other category, which is the government itself.
[Guest]: I mean, let's think of the government as money for the moment. You know what I mean? Government
[Guest]: as capital or government as intervener. And we separate that from government as government.
[Guest]: Government as money has its own challenges, because in theory, they have a fair amount
[Guest]: of capital, but of money. But in practice, that money, there's a lot of pressure on that
[Guest]: money to do so many other things, even within the framework of a pandemic, protect livelihoods,
[Guest]: figure out the vaccine strategy. There's a lot of stuff. There's a pressure on that money.
[Guest]: And the health care system in particular is overwhelmed. And most people, when they hear
[Guest]: this word overwhelmed, they think the hospital normally can take 50 people, but it's getting
[Guest]: 18. That's actually not the level of overwhelming that's going on. The hospital can take 50,
[Guest]: they're getting 350. It's not 2x. It's 7x and 8x in many places. There are PHCs, primary
[Guest]: health centers, where people call to say, in my jurisdiction, there are 2,500 positive
[Guest]: cases of COVID. And I'm the only worker in this health center for a variety of reasons.
[Guest]: And typically, that last worker is a woman. It's only going to be a few days before her
[Guest]: husband, her father says, you can't go. That's all there is. If this is the situation out
[Guest]: there, you can't go to work, right? Or you're going to get COVID anyway. It's better you
[Guest]: get fake COVID. These kinds of realities will start to emerge if you're not careful in this
[Guest]: stuff. And some of it, we are seeing that. I'm not making up those realities. These are
[Guest]: not just possibilities. You see them. So the government's money is slow to execute because
[Guest]: of the procurement rules in government. And when you bypass them also, it's not easy.
[Guest]: The government's procurement of what is needed, whether it's people or anything else, it works
[Guest]: on the assumption that people always want to sell to you. Because you're a bulk buyer.
[Guest]: You know what I mean? You put out a tender for something. Typically, you'll find somebody
[Guest]: bidding. But in a situation like this, when the thing you're trying to bid a buyer, whether
[Guest]: it's an oxygen plant or a concentrator or whatever it is, or a ventilator, that thing
[Guest]: is in such demand, not just in India. The Brazilians want it. The Peruvians want it.
[Guest]: The Africans want it. Everybody wants the thing that you're trying to buy in scale,
[Guest]: massive volumes, right? So if you put out a tender, nothing will happen. Nobody will
[Guest]: even bother, right? Sometimes you have to put out a really large tender. For example,
[Guest]: there are districts now where they're saying, we'll hire pulmonologists on short-term 11-month
[Guest]: contracts at four lakhs a month, which is, you know, in the government sector, that's
[Guest]: pretty decent money. It's impressive money, I would even say, in the government sector.
[Guest]: But in many scenarios, you're not actually going to see it. Maybe people will respond.
[Guest]: Maybe the doctor making a lakh and a half, two lakh at a private hospital will think,
[Guest]: why not? Eleven months, I can do some stuff in a government hospital and make twice that
[Guest]: money. That might happen. But that's not going to add fundamental capacity. It's either he's
[Guest]: doing something in the private sector hospital or he's doing it in the public sector hospital.
[Guest]: It's not an extra doctor. It's the same doctor. So this kind of money doesn't create rapid
[Guest]: manpower. That's a different problem. But in equipment, you can certainly do that. You
[Guest]: can certainly hire ten more things produced. But the bidding and tendering process is just
[Guest]: simply not there. You can even say, I will allow no-bid contracts to happen. I will allow
[Guest]: procurement to happen. But there's nobody in government who's gone out and procured
[Guest]: in that way, in a competitive way, by calling up a vendor, having that conversation, negotiating
[Guest]: the details. You will do this other part, all of that stuff. That's why their procurement
[Guest]: is slow. And so they need a little bit of handholding in that for the large purchases.
[Guest]: So one of the ways in which you can make up for slow procurement is through bulk purchasing.
[Guest]: So you say, look, it'll take me three weeks to figure out how to execute the thing, but
[Guest]: let's buy 300 of the things that we are buying instead of 10. So therefore, TKI makes up.
[Guest]: Maybe some guy can do it really faster than me, but he can only buy 10 at a time. So you
[Guest]: catch up in the long run. But it also means that in the immediate term, you can't do anything.
[Guest]: And if people are dying 4,000 a day, the reports are 4,000 a day. The actuals, I'm certain,
[Guest]: are not that number. You can't do anything in the near term because it takes you three
[Guest]: weeks to get organized. So these are the role players in how the response needs to be organized.
[Guest]: And then there are these people creating new solutions. How do you create a 10-bed ICU
[Guest]: in a small geography? How do you create a new oxygen-generating plant? It'll take you
[Guest]: three months, but after that, you'll be able to produce five a day. And then the Maruti's
[Guest]: and the Linde's of the world who are trying to fix key pieces of the infrastructure. How
[Guest]: do you get the tankers in place, the supply in place? How do you create oxygen hubs? I
[Guest]: mean, the number of things that need to be done here is spectacular. I'll send you a
[Guest]: list of how we are bucketing the things that need to be done, right? What needs to be done
[Guest]: in the hospital? What needs to be done outside the hospital? What needs to be done in the
[Guest]: supply chain? What needs to be done for baseline healthcare itself? What needs to be done in
[Guest]: the genome companies? What needs to be done on the fundraising side? I mean, it's just,
[Guest]: it's a very, very large number of things that need to be done. And it's impossible really
[Guest]: from any vantage point to have a full picture of it, but it is possible to immerse yourself
[Guest]: in that effort and give yourself a chance to let that full picture fly past you, if
[Guest]: nothing else. So that every once in a while you see one piece of it and you say, okay,
[Guest]: here's something that I can do personally, because either I know how to make that connection
[Guest]: or somebody in this ecosystem knows how to make this connection.
[Guest]: So this morning, for example, I talked to someone who was trying to build a large volunteer
[Guest]: organization, right? So look, one way of building a really large volunteer organization is to
[Guest]: pick a first problem for which people are naturally inclined to volunteer anyway. And
[Guest]: COVID is frankly a great jumping off point, if that's your goal. And so you say, okay,
[Guest]: you're trying to build a national volunteer organization, COVID or no COVID, that's what
[Guest]: you're trying to do. Here's a way of getting that started. Do this first for COVID relief,
[Guest]: right? And if you're interested, their goal now marries with the immediate goal of providing
[Guest]: relief for COVID. So you have to find the pieces that are naturally
[Guest]: inclined to do something that forms part of the total picture anyway, and get them neatly
[Guest]: hooked into something that they can do immediately in a way that provides strength to the immediate
[Guest]: effort and actually gives them a greater chance of doing what they want to do in the long
[Guest]: run. If you pull that exercise off, you can build the channels much faster.
[Amit Varma]: So in the context of COVID, you've laid out a very fascinating look at all the different
[Amit Varma]: categories of people who are helping, whether it's development sector, whether it's large
[Amit Varma]: donors, whether it's individuals and corporations, middle management, who can, you know, leverage
[Amit Varma]: capacities in their companies, besides contributing individually, it's business owners, it's a
[Amit Varma]: government, it's all of that. And equally, these are the people who are doing something.
[Amit Varma]: And there are many people who you're saying are outside of this, who are not really doing
[Amit Varma]: much and who won't, you know, before we go into the weeds, and I want to kind of spend
[Amit Varma]: the rest of the episode in the weeds with you talking about specifics and particulars,
[Amit Varma]: I first want to kind of ask a general question, which is sparked by something you said earlier,
[Amit Varma]: when you know, you were speaking about how you don't believe that how there are people
[Amit Varma]: who are inclined to help, and they will help anyway, but many people may not change their
[Amit Varma]: approach to helping. Now, I was looking back at some of the writing I had done during a
[Amit Varma]: previous natural disaster, which was a tsunami in 2004, at the end of 2004. And at that time,
[Amit Varma]: I traveled across the coast of Tamil Nadu with a friend of mine after it happened with
[Amit Varma]: a bunch of friends, we'd gone with a group trying to help out and I was kind of live
[Amit Varma]: blogging from there. And I was calling my series dispatches, the way Michael Hurr called
[Amit Varma]: his Vietnam thing dispatches. And my dispatch number 36 is titled the broader continuing
[Amit Varma]: disaster. And my main point there was that look, this is a disaster, the tsunami is a
[Amit Varma]: disaster. But a lot of the things that we are trying to sort of help out with our problems
[Amit Varma]: that have been with us forever, for example, a cyclone just hit Bombay, right? Now a cyclone
[Amit Varma]: will come, it will make some people homeless, and immediately there'll be relief for the
[Amit Varma]: homeless people. But the point is, millions of Indians are homeless anyway. For example,
[Amit Varma]: a migrant labor crisis will happen when the lockdown is called. And some really fine people
[Amit Varma]: will go out there sort of feeding people. But the point is that we've always had problem
[Amit Varma]: of hunger. In fact, we still do like in a column I wrote last year, I pointed out a
[Amit Varma]: 3,000 children die every day in India, from starvation, one in four Indian children are
[Amit Varma]: malnourished. My point being that we notice these things, the homelessness, the deaths,
[Amit Varma]: the hunger, when there is something like COVID-19 or something like a tsunami or something like
[Amit Varma]: a cyclone approximate event brings it into relief. But these have always been with us.
[Amit Varma]: And I have some questions here. And one of my questions is that, could we then say that,
[Amit Varma]: by and large, the apathy that most people display towards this is a natural defense
[Amit Varma]: mechanism? Because most of us will think that, hey, I can't do something about such a big
[Amit Varma]: problem, or I don't want to, or hey, screw it, I need to get on with my own life. And
[Amit Varma]: therefore, this becomes a defense mechanism. And another added narrative element to the
[Amit Varma]: defense mechanism is we rant against the state. We say the state should be doing all of this.
[Amit Varma]: Why isn't the state doing anything? And that kind of becomes an approach that keeps us
[Amit Varma]: trapped in apathy. Like even now, I see many people like yourself and your colleagues like
[Amit Varma]: Ruben Mascarenhas and so on, who are out there every day, obsessed with helping others. And
[Amit Varma]: I see a lot of people just outraging on social media, but not actually doing anything themselves.
[Amit Varma]: And I don't want this just to be a rant. But I just wonder, like, for example, there's
[Amit Varma]: almost an ecosystem of relief that has happened, partly including people who were doing things
[Amit Varma]: to help society before, partly including a lot of people who weren't, who now suddenly
[Amit Varma]: see the pain around them, feel the loss, and they say, hey, I want to help, I want to donate,
[Amit Varma]: I want to organize something, I want to do this. How much of that will remain after this
[Amit Varma]: pandemic? What is it that, you know, needs to be done for people to realize that shit,
[Amit Varma]: you know, this has caused a lot of pain, but we live with a lot of pain on a daily basis.
[Amit Varma]: 3000 people dying every day of starvation is, you know, how is it not comparable with
[Amit Varma]: the people who are dying of COVID? That's a solvable problem. You know, and you can't
[Amit Varma]: just take the cop out and say that, hey, the, you know, the state has failed us, which is
[Amit Varma]: fine. But, you know, like in my last episode with Karthik, for example, we had that discussion
[Amit Varma]: on, you know, my growing feeling that we cannot depend just on the state, I'm okay that we
[Amit Varma]: should try to work with the state, we should be stakeholders. But a lot of these solutions
[Amit Varma]: have to come from private people just going out there and saying that there are problems,
[Amit Varma]: I want to solve them, whether you're doing it in a non-profit way, or whether some of
[Amit Varma]: these problems, you say that I will build a business out of it, but there are problems
[Amit Varma]: that need to be solved. What is your sort of thinking on all of this? And is it something
[Amit Varma]: that has evolved or gained detail over the last few months?
[Guest]: It is a defense mechanism, but it's not a natural defense mechanism. So I'd make that
[Guest]: distinction first. It's a, it's a cultivated defense mechanism. And really, to understand
[Guest]: it correctly, in my mind, at least, you have to ask yourself, what is the difference between
[Guest]: a community and a campus? If you answer that question, you will be able to figure out the
[Guest]: rest of it easily. Every community is a campus, but not every campus is a community. Right?
[Guest]: People say my apartment community or in my whatever, office community. A lot of the things
[Guest]: that we call communities are only campuses. They're not really communities.
[Guest]: Can you define campus for me in this context?
[Guest]: Something that has a wall and a gate and a way of living and using it within that space,
[Guest]: which is it could be even a BSNL housing society. It could be your apartment community or mine
[Guest]: or a corporate office block built by some, you know, construction company. It could be
[Guest]: any of these kinds of things. These are campuses. If you don't have a natural way of belonging
[Guest]: in that space, you can't be there. There are lots of ways of ensuring, in fact, that you
[Guest]: are not there. If you want to walk on 25 streets in Bombay, or if I want to walk on 50 streets
[Guest]: in Bangalore, I really don't need to ask anybody, right? I have a natural way of being there,
[Guest]: which is not challenged in any way. Right? That doesn't make those people my community.
[Guest]: But I'm saying space is one part of understanding the difference between a campus and a community.
[Guest]: I mean, think about a community in this way. Even in a closed community, somebody has to
[Guest]: live on the edge of the community. So let's say you have the plot at the edge of the community
[Guest]: or the apartment at the edge of the community. What you're really saying is that my neighbor
[Unknown]: on my left is my neighbor, and he's part of my community. My neighbor on my right is not
[Guest]: even part of my community. Imagine living on a street of houses, on a public street
[Guest]: of houses, and saying the guy on my right is not my neighbor. You would not do that.
[Guest]: First of all, it's ridiculous. Second, it's a cultivated thing. It's that wall that's
[Guest]: making you think he's not your neighbor. You pay a certain maintenance fee every month,
[Guest]: he doesn't do that. You have certain services inside your community that you've organized
[Guest]: for yourself, he's not part of that. He might, in fact, be part of another set of such services
[Guest]: in his community. So it's not like you're excluding him, you're hoping that he's got
[Guest]: his own setup in some way. But I'm saying there is a cultivated difference.
[Guest]: So I think earlier also we spoke about this. Everybody has got security guards. What are
[Guest]: these security guards doing? People are just standing at some standpost, really, and doing
[Guest]: some bizarre things, writing things on notebooks that nobody even looks at. In fact, I've tried
[Guest]: one exercise a lot. When I get this notification on some app that the community has to say,
[Guest]: oh, so-and-so has come to see you. Should we let them in? And I always say no. Right?
[Guest]: And they let them in anyway. It's a process. Somebody has to ask whether this person should
[Guest]: be let in. Somebody has to note down that there has to be a response. And after that,
[Guest]: the person can be let in. Actually, if the response is no, what you should do is not
[Guest]: written down anywhere in most of these places. Maybe in the companies, it's a little different
[Guest]: because you're going into somebody's office to see. But you can try all these little experiments
[Guest]: that teach you that these are processes that exist for the sake of having a process. They
[Guest]: have the illusion of a community. They're actually nothing more than some silly campus
[Guest]: thing. Right? And Peter Block is the guy who really, in my mind, wrote about this in the
[Guest]: most impactful way. He wrote a book called Community. And the essence of that is that
[Guest]: communities work on trust. And they try to enable the gifts of each person in that community.
[Guest]: Right? Amit Verma has a gift for communication. Whether he's a four-year-old child or a 45-year-old
[Guest]: man is not different. With this gift for communication, what can we do that really is powerful for
[Guest]: so many other people in this space, whether there's a wall or not a wall? And maybe, like,
[Guest]: what can you do even outside this space like you're doing? That's one way of thinking about
[Guest]: people. Another way of thinking about people is out of fear and distrust. That you believe
[Guest]: the person who is coming to visit your neighbor in your apartment community could potentially
[Guest]: come to your house and rob you, could potentially assault your teenage daughter. You start with
[Guest]: believing that. And therefore, you say, well, we need a system that protects us from that.
[Guest]: People have lived on the street for the longest time without that system. Right? I mean, on
[Guest]: street side houses for the longest time without that system. The system does not come from
[Guest]: the security guard or the MyGate application. It actually comes from something else. It's
[Guest]: a cultivated way of thinking that fear and distrust are necessary parts of how you respond
[Guest]: to large, complex problems, which you think you cannot grapple with. You refer to people
[Guest]: saying I can't deal with this. But their response to I can't deal with this is sometimes to
[Guest]: say I need somebody to help me deal with this. And they choose the wrong guy. They really
[Guest]: should be going to people who teach them how to help build strong communities. They shouldn't
[Guest]: be going to people who teach them how to hire security guards. And frankly, those same security
[Guest]: guards can be used in very different ways. You teach them to work like an usher. You
[Guest]: teach them to work like a receiving agent for materials that need to be dispatched.
[Guest]: There's a million things you can do that give them also more dignity than to just stand
[Guest]: around in the sun or in the rain and give them actually some competence that they can
[Guest]: take into another job if they want to, that frees them from the bondage into which they
[Guest]: have come into your large city from Jharkhand or Orissa or whatever kind of thing.
[Guest]: I'm saying we have to think of different groups of people in the society in a way that enables
[Guest]: that, that gives to the guy standing at the gate, he has to be part of your community.
[Guest]: How can you say that somebody who is a service provider to your community is not a member
[Guest]: of your community? I just don't accept that. But we have a cultivated way of coming to
[Guest]: this stuff, which is just mind-numbing. And I think it's happening in the schools, it's
[Guest]: happening in the companies, it's happening in the workplaces in a way that you have to
[Guest]: beat this socially.
[Guest]: I mean, during the previous campaigns, the India Against Corruption campaign or even
[Guest]: the election campaigns, I've observed this, but people would say, sir, you can't trust
[Guest]: anybody. But if you go and talk to his neighbor, he'll say the same thing. So Amit says he
[Guest]: can't trust his neighbor. Amit's neighbor says you can't trust Amit. And the funny part
[Guest]: is both Amit and his neighbor will say to me, you and I know each other, therefore we
[Guest]: can trust each other. You are trustworthy, I know, but my neighbor may not. And my neighbor
[Guest]: also says the same thing, Ashwin sir, you are trustworthy, you and I know each other,
[Guest]: but therefore you cannot trust everybody. You know what I mean? I think we have to crack
[Guest]: this in a different way. I remember an old article I wrote about the importance of wanting
[Guest]: to do the right thing, even if you can't do it. You ask kids, what do you want to do when
[Guest]: you grow up? And every once in a while, there'll be a girl who says, I want to change the world.
[Guest]: I think it's important to help young people in particular believe that they should want
[Guest]: to change the world for the better. They may not be able to, but I think it's extraordinarily
[Guest]: important to teach a child, you should change the world for the better. Because other people
[Guest]: before you have tried to change the world for the better, and you are a beneficiary
[Guest]: of that, number one. Second, this is what distinguishes you as a human from many other
[Guest]: species that you could have been members of. And it's a decent thing to do. There's a contractual
[Guest]: social arrangement built into this thing. And most importantly, if you believe this,
[Guest]: you will spend your life in the company of people that you will respect, and people who
[Guest]: will inspire you. And I think, you know, that's really important. At some level, I mean, I'm
[Guest]: much older than I am when I started doing all this stuff. But at some level, I've always
[Guest]: said, I'm a child of the development experience in this country, right? I have a family, because
[Guest]: I'm a child of that development experience. And that family includes all sorts of people
[Guest]: in the development sector, it includes people like you, it includes people that you come
[Guest]: into contact with, whose collective intent represents some larger public good, which
[Guest]: I may not always be able to contour correctly. But that intent itself nourishes my life.
[Guest]: And that intent really can shape a lot of young lives. And I really think that's important
[Guest]: to be able to hold on to the idea that to live in an empathetic and decent way is something
[Guest]: we should expect of our neighbor, not be content with saying, well, Bhagwan jane, who can believe
[Guest]: him? Or who can trust him? Well, and also, I think people would trust each other a little
[Guest]: bit more if they just know each other. I don't know if I did this seven four letter words
[Guest]: thing with you the last time. I think I did that.
[Guest]: You did.
[Guest]: I always tell people go and meet new people, right? And they will say, it's not, it's not
[Guest]: easy to meet new people. What nonsense, go on the street, all kinds of people that you
[Guest]: don't know, just go up to them and say hello. And they think that's really odd. But actually,
[Guest]: if you did that for 10 days, it'll stop being odd. And then you'll start to think, why don't
[Guest]: I know all these people? They're around me all the time, this shopkeeper, this laundryman,
[Guest]: you know, you know, the laundryman who comes to your house, you don't know the laundryman
[Guest]: who comes to your neighbor's house. So there's all of these bizarre things that there's a
[Guest]: lot of neighborliness without neighborhood. There's a lot of campus without community.
[Guest]: There's a lot of, you know, there's a lot of that. It's that small nuance. And it makes
[Guest]: all the difference. And even about relief, I've been saying, relief is not a logistics
[Guest]: problem. Aid is not a logistics issue. You must get in the aid thing because you believe
[Guest]: in the fundamental dignity of other people to live in a way that with at least a minimum
[Guest]: standard of protection for their lives and livelihoods, and to be able to count on each
[Guest]: other in times like this. That's why you go and do aid, not because it's technomanagerially
[Guest]: needed on the day the pandemic or the cyclone or the tsunamis hits you. Incidentally, about
[Guest]: the tsunami, one of the very first things I did with Mapunity was mapping out tsunami
[Guest]: relief stuff. So I remember that, you know, starting point quite well.
[Amit Varma]: So a lot of strands to pick up from and first of all, for my listeners, you mentioned all
[Amit Varma]: those four letter words, I recommend all the listeners to check out episode 160 of the
[Amit Varma]: scene and the unseen, which was where Ashwin first appeared and it remains a favorite episode
[Amit Varma]: for many people. And the first half of that was not so much about his work, but his philosophy
[Amit Varma]: towards life. And there's a lot that I found very inspiring there. So do check that out.
[Amit Varma]: I'll link it from the show notes.
[Guest]: I want to go back to what Karthik said in the last episode. You asked me about that.
[Guest]: I don't remember the exact question that you asked, but I felt like for part of that conversation,
[Guest]: you were continuing a debate that we had in my second episode with you, which was, you
[Guest]: know, some people even wrote to me about it and said, I noticed it was quite, you know,
[Guest]: back and forth at the end. It was really a contrast between two ways of thinking. And
[Guest]: this whole state, you are the state kind of thing.
[Amit Varma]: Let's come to that. I want to respond to what you just said. So before we lose the thread,
[Amit Varma]: and then I'll come back to that question. You know, I agree with the conclusion that
[Amit Varma]: you came to, which is that we need to beat this socially, this problem of apathy. And
[Amit Varma]: I also kind of agree with a lot of your diagnosis, but not with some of the terms. For example,
[Amit Varma]: you spoke about how this kind of apathy is cultivated. And I would actually say that
[Amit Varma]: it's the opposite, that this apathy is evolved and the way that we beat it, that is what
[Amit Varma]: we have to cultivate. For example, you know, evolutionary psychologists will often talk
[Amit Varma]: about how there is a circle of 150 people that we can really remember by face, we can't
[Amit Varma]: remember more people than that by face. So we divide the world into this is our tribe,
[Amit Varma]: and everything else is the other in the sense that our brains evolved in prehistoric times.
[Amit Varma]: That is how we are wired to think we are of course wired to think in contradictory ways,
[Amit Varma]: but this is a core way. Now, a concept that I found that influenced me profoundly came
[Amit Varma]: from a book written in I think 1900. It's about the history of morals by W.E.H. Leckie,
[Amit Varma]: where he talks about something called the expanding circle. And his point there is that
[Amit Varma]: he doesn't pick up on this 150 people concept, but he says that look, who are the people
[Amit Varma]: we consider worthy of a moral consideration? Initially, it is a very small circle, maybe
[Amit Varma]: it's just a family, then it expands to our tribe. And initially, it's very few people
[Amit Varma]: because our brains have evolved in times of scarcity, you know, daily survival is almost
[Amit Varma]: like a zero sum fight with others. But gradually as society evolves, and it's no longer zero
[Amit Varma]: sum from your family, your circle will expand to maybe your tribe, then maybe your neighborhood,
[Amit Varma]: it will become a country, it will become your people, your race, your species. And Leckie's
[Amit Varma]: point was that through history, we found that circle moving to a point that, you know, for
[Amit Varma]: many people, it includes all human beings. And Peter Singer, I think, wrote a book called
[Amit Varma]: The Utilitarian Philosopher, who was also an animal rights activist, wrote a book called
[Amit Varma]: The Expanding Circle, in fact, I think where his argument was that one day the circle will
[Amit Varma]: expand enough to include animals in it, which is actually a powerful argument. I don't see
[Amit Varma]: why not. And we could easily, you know, three centuries later, be judging all the people
[Amit Varma]: who live today, saying that, Oh, my God, what savages they ate meat in the same way that,
[Amit Varma]: you know, people today will judge people two centuries ago and say, Oh, my God, they had
[Amit Varma]: slaves, women couldn't vote. So a circle is expanding. And this is a good thing. But my
[Amit Varma]: argument would be that what is natural to us, what has evolved is this sense of dividing
[Amit Varma]: the world into us versus the other. And what has been cultivated, perhaps since the Enlightenment
[Amit Varma]: in an organized way, is this sense that no, the circle is expanding, it involves all of
[Amit Varma]: us. And in a sense, we are fighting this sort of tribalistic hardwiring. And one modern
[Amit Varma]: problem that we face is that a lot of our politics is going straight into that old hardwiring
[Amit Varma]: that we are trying to fight, where a lot of our politics is thinking in tribalistic term
[Amit Varma]: is painting others, like the German political theorist, Carl Schmitt spoke about how to
[Amit Varma]: be successful in politics, you need to have an enemy, or you need to construct an enemy,
[Amit Varma]: there is no politics without an enemy. And this seems to feed again, to that tribal instinct.
[Amit Varma]: And even within this pandemic, instead of, you know, all of us are united by our suffering
[Amit Varma]: by what we are going through. And yet, you still see the same political tropes happen
[Amit Varma]: where one side will take, you know, one narrative line, another side will take another narrative
[Amit Varma]: line. But my point is the same as yours, that we need to continue the cultivation of the
[Amit Varma]: expansion of that circle, that expanding circle, we needed to expand. And that, to me, is a
[Amit Varma]: social battle, more than anything else. So one, do you have any thoughts to add to this?
[Amit Varma]: And two, we can then move on to the question I asked about the state versus, you know,
[Amit Varma]: that we need to not do the cop out of saying the state will do it, or we need to work with
[Amit Varma]: the state, but actually say that, look, we got to get down and dirty much as you are,
[Guest]: and we need to solve these problems ourselves. Yeah, I mean, I mean, there's a temporal element
[Guest]: to it. I promised myself I wouldn't talk like Karthik. So let me tell you what I mean. I
[Guest]: can't also. I mean, the guy is great. He can use words with such precise meanings at breakneck
[Guest]: speed without making even a mistake in how he delivers it. I can't even believe that.
[Guest]: But to come back to it, what do I mean is, this expanding circle thing is not a sequence.
[Guest]: That's all it is. I care about my children because they are my children. But it is possible
[Guest]: at the same time to care about children because they are children too, right? They're just
[Guest]: not my children, right? In fact, you know, if you didn't know in the universe of children
[Guest]: which child was yours, you would actually have a very different way of treating children,
[Guest]: right? There is an element, I think what you're saying and all these philosophers have been
[Guest]: saying is that knowing who is your child, who is your brother, who is your neighbor
[Guest]: itself has a certain boundary in how you behave. And then you start to say, therefore, I behave
[Guest]: in a certain way inside this boundary, in a certain way outside that boundary. And maybe
[Guest]: this campus is just a reflection of that. But I actually think the way to beat that
[Guest]: is not to say, let's all build 10 campuses or 10 boundaries, and then we'll figure out
[Guest]: how to transact and interact across boundaries. You could do that. But I think it's not that
[Guest]: necessary to tell you the truth. You could say, because I care about my children anyway,
[Guest]: there's no reason not to care about other children also now. Even if you thought about
[Guest]: a sequence, you already care about your children. So what does sequence mean at that point?
[Guest]: So you ought to be caring about all children now. So you may not be able to do all things
[Guest]: for all children, or like you would for your own. But I think there is a reasonable way
[Guest]: of saying, even if I have these boundaries, these boundaries reflect capacity. If there
[Guest]: is a boundary, it's the boundary of my capacity. It's not the boundary of my empathy. It's
[Guest]: not the boundary of my preferred intent for why I live the way I do. I think it is possible
[Guest]: for people to say that. And they will still have the boundaries that come from capacity.
[Guest]: You can't do everything. That's life. In fact, that's just reality. But also, I think there's
[Guest]: a way to think of this, which is just that little bit. It's like watching the tail of
[Guest]: a tiger when you're walking in a forest behind a tree. You see the tail of the tiger and
[Guest]: you ask yourself, what should I think now? That the rest of the tiger is attached to
[Guest]: it or that this is some discarded tail from an old tiger carcass? You can think all sorts
[Guest]: of things. Francis Crick wrote a book about all this stuff. It's called The Astonishing
[Guest]: Hypothesis. We should talk about that someday. But I think there's a lot that we don't see.
[Guest]: And that's really the point. We believe what we see actually can mean lots of things. We
[Guest]: believe what the brain is telling us about what we see. We believe it only when we see
[Guest]: it. But we believe it when we hear it from other people. Hearing it is actually a kind
[Guest]: of seeing it if you hear it from trusted sources. So there's lots of these kinds of nuances.
[Guest]: I think it's possible to treat this boundary that you're referring to, the circle, wherever
[Guest]: you draw that circle. If that circle is a circle of capacity rather than a circle of
[Guest]: intent, there's nothing wrong with it. But if it's a circle of intent, then there's a
[Amit Varma]: problem. Fair enough. Moving on now to Karthik's questions,
[Amit Varma]: I mean, or what I discussed with him, where I don't want to take the stand that the state
[Amit Varma]: has no role to play. I mean, of course it does. We know what it should do. This is and
[Amit Varma]: has failed in many of them. And we should work with the state to make it work. But the
[Amit Varma]: sense increasingly grows upon me that at some point, we can't just say that the solution
[Amit Varma]: lies to the state, you know, we have to step up, we have to try to solve these problems
[Guest]: ourselves. Yes, I mean, and it goes to this idea of
[Guest]: you are the state that, you know, I had chats with you about, and Karthik sort of, I think
[Guest]: he's starting to lean that way a little bit as well. But I think I don't mean to dismiss
[Guest]: what you said earlier, which is, hey, I've done my part of what I should be doing. I'm
[Guest]: not indifferent. I certainly have cared about lots of people. I've done what I could in
[Guest]: my spheres of influence. I've even paid my taxes on top of that, right? So the state,
[Guest]: I have a reasonable right to expect the state should do its job. And I think it's fair.
[Guest]: I think the state should do its job. I believe the state should do its job. It does have
[Guest]: a capacity problem in addition to everything else that is true. And then actually, if I
[Guest]: help the state do its job, it would be easier for me to demand that it does its job. Today,
[Guest]: there's a lot of people who don't help the state do its job. That's one of the reasons
[Guest]: why they're not able to demand that the state should do the job. That's what I mean. That
[Guest]: is the sociopolitical element. What I mean, I'll give you a transactional example, right?
[Guest]: What I mean by a transactional example is what you are aware of some problem. There
[Guest]: is an engineer or a public health official or somebody in the state who should do something
[Guest]: about it. One very small part of moving that line is to draw the attention of that person
[Guest]: to something that has happened. If a water main breaks on your street, yeah, you could
[Guest]: say the state should be putting detection technologies and IOTS platforms everywhere
[Guest]: to figure out if the water main is breaking and having a dashboard from which they can
[Guest]: tell that. That's true. But even before these things became possible, somehow somebody in
[Guest]: the state needs to know that this water main is broken. If it's not, you can't put IOTS
[Guest]: machines on everything. There is an element of knowing, and the element of knowing that
[Guest]: is possible from the population itself at large can never be mimicked by the state.
[Guest]: It just cannot. There are just too many things that can go wrong that nobody can actually
[Guest]: mimic. No state can mimic that. The velocity of the state's response depends on the state
[Guest]: getting to know these things. Also, among other things, right? If you know the state,
[Guest]: you can solve that part of the puzzle. I know my local BESCOM engineer, my BWSSB water manager,
[Guest]: some five, six guys like that, right? If I see something wrong, even if it's not actually
[Guest]: in my house, I'm driving down the street, I'm walking down the street, I see something
[Guest]: wrong, I could call the guy up and say, do something about it. You could say he might
[Guest]: do something about it because I'm calling him. But you could also say he's doing something
[Guest]: about it because that's the first time he's hearing about it. He's operating in a world
[Guest]: that he doesn't really have knowledge of. So I think there are elements of what you
[Guest]: are seeing which are certainly true. But there are also elements of what I'm saying that
[Guest]: are necessary. That is, after I have told him that there is something wrong, that he
[Guest]: should do something about it, I'm actually in a much better position to say, I told you.
[Guest]: Why the hell didn't you do something about it? Whereas the guys who are completely outside
[Guest]: the system, it is true that they don't bring it to the attention of the system, but they
[Guest]: also don't have the ability, the capacity to ask that second question.
[Guest]: So I think if our expectation is that the state should deliver on the things that we
[Guest]: expect from it, I think that expectation is actually benefited by my assisting the state.
[Guest]: It's not substituted by my assisting the state. And it's a debatable point. I'm sure you can
[Guest]: think of seven examples of that. But I'm saying there is an element of that.
[Amit Varma]: So we've debated this in our previous episodes. So I'll just direct the listeners to that.
[Amit Varma]: I won't go back to that. But a quick kind of example comes to mind, sort of illustrating
[Amit Varma]: what this means. I mean, first of all, my fundamental point is that, look, the whole
[Amit Varma]: point of the state being there is that there are certain things I should be able to rely
[Amit Varma]: on it to do. That's why I pay my taxes. That I don't want to have to go and do the rule
[Amit Varma]: of law myself. I don't have to go and do the drainage myself.
[Amit Varma]: I buy your point that if my drainage is overflowing outside my house, I have to first bring it
[Amit Varma]: to their attention as a citizen. You know, that I have to do. But if they are not fixing
[Amit Varma]: it for many days and people are falling ill, then at some point I have to say that, okay,
[Amit Varma]: me and my immediate neighbors need to sort this out because it's affecting us.
[Amit Varma]: The other kind of thought that strikes me is, let's do a thought experiment. Let's say
[Amit Varma]: that from where I am sitting, I can look outside and I can see that someone is beating a little
[Amit Varma]: girl on the road. Now, the first informational thing about, I mean, the state can't be everywhere.
[Amit Varma]: So one thing I could do is let the state know, call a cop and immediately tell him. That's
[Amit Varma]: obviously not all. What I should do is I should go out there myself and I should stop that
[Amit Varma]: immediate beating happening. The other question that then comes up is what if the person doing
[Amit Varma]: the beating is the state? What if it is the policeman who's beating a little girl, which
[Amit Varma]: is kind of a separate problem, but a relevant one in terms of COVID as well, because in
[Amit Varma]: terms of misinformation and a lot of the things that the state has done in terms of getting
[Amit Varma]: in the way of private enterprise, it's not just sins of omission, there are sins of commission
[Amit Varma]: as well. And you know, I've done an episode with Jason Brennan, the philosopher on that
[Amit Varma]: about that if the state does something wrong, does it have some extra leeway or is it is
[Amit Varma]: wrong wrong. And I agree with him that wrong is wrong, regardless of who does it. But that's
[Amit Varma]: a separate issue. I just think that there are certain moments where individuals have
[Amit Varma]: to come in and we'll drill a little bit deeper in that in the context of COVID because I'm
[Amit Varma]: certain that, you know, a lot of the things that are wrong with healthcare today are wrong
[Amit Varma]: with the kind of lives which people live in the context of how healthy they are and how
[Amit Varma]: they take care of it. A lot of it simply cannot be solved by the state because capacity issues
[Amit Varma]: to begin with, let's leave the other structural issues out of the way. Let's let's move on
[Amit Varma]: to the immediate now to the main subject of this episode. And I think a simple way to
[Amit Varma]: sort of dive into it rather than just talk at the level of ideas is a chronological sense.
[Amit Varma]: Like I did an episode with your colleague Ruben Mascarenas, who did such amazing work
[Amit Varma]: last year during the lockdown when the migrant labor crisis happened and he and his group
[Amit Varma]: Khana Chahiye, you know, went around and fed so many people and Ruben in his individual
[Amit Varma]: capacity in the second wave has been helping people with beds and medicines and all of
[Amit Varma]: that and Khana Chahiye have also started an oxygen ambulance thing, all of which is incredible.
[Amit Varma]: And I know that you're involved at a socio political level in getting things done at
[Amit Varma]: the level of a city. We've discussed that in detail in the last two episodes. But in
[Amit Varma]: terms of immediate COVID relief, I think the easiest way to dive in is through the chronology
[Amit Varma]: where tell me a little bit about how your kind of thinking about this began, what are
[Amit Varma]: the moments where you began to say, no, I got to do something here. I got to do something
[Amit Varma]: here and here and here. And how does your vision deepen? Therefore, equally at the same
[Amit Varma]: time, how does your spheres of activity widen?
[Guest]: So it doesn't begin like that. That's I mean, if you take the Khana Chahiye example itself.
[Guest]: Yes, Neerajan, Ruben and all those guys did extraordinary stuff on the ground. But what
[Guest]: happens is when you start to do that kind of stuff, you say, we need to raise more money,
[Guest]: for example, or we can't really see this properly. We're not able to present it to the municipal
[Guest]: corporation in a way that convinces them that they should be looking at it in a different
[Guest]: way. So typically, what will happen, you're trying to solve that problem. Someone will
[Guest]: call you and say, can you help a little bit round up some more money to feed people? Can
[Guest]: you can map unity help map all these things so that we can actually look at it on a spatial
[Guest]: platform? Do you have a tool that will help us gather this information? Because you have
[Guest]: volunteers on the ground doing 27 different things. They're all related activity, but
[Guest]: you don't have a way to gather them. So what happens is that your first involvement with
[Guest]: any problem is techno managing it. But it is happening in a world that is already sociopolitical.
[Guest]: The Ruben Maskar and associates of the world are already my friends, already my allies,
[Guest]: already my whatever, family, extended family in some way. So it's you're only asking questions
[Guest]: within that family. So for you, if the question doesn't come to you as something that creates
[Guest]: a tipping point, it comes to you as something that creates capacity. First, right, we can
[Guest]: do more of this, if all of us pull together. And this is the same thing. Even if you look
[Guest]: at COVID, right, the first set of things don't come to you as in this way of deciding that
[Guest]: we must do something. You never actually make that decision. You come to that point because
[Guest]: you are transactionally, and what I mean by that is at an activity level, involved in
[Guest]: the bits and pieces of that response, right? Whether I'm inside the state or outside the
[Guest]: state, whether through technology or not, in all sorts of ways, right? Somebody needs
[Guest]: to get something delivered in Chitradurga, right? So people say, you know what, let me
[Guest]: ask Ashwin, he's bound to know somebody in Chitradurga. So I'm asking somebody in Chitradurga,
[Guest]: there's some medicine that needs to reach some family, there's some difficulty in getting
[Guest]: this delivered. You know Chitradurga well, help this guy get this delivered. So it's
[Guest]: transactional, it's activity at that level. But in the process of doing that, you are
[Guest]: now in the medical relief supply chain in some way, right? And then you recognize patterns
[Guest]: in it. You say, oh, I did this in Chitradurga yesterday, I'm doing this in Anekal today,
[Guest]: I'm doing this in Karwar tomorrow. And then you start to tell yourself, this is not going
[Guest]: to scale if we do it like this. We need somebody in the system who can take all these requests,
[Guest]: contact all the people that we know in all of these different geographies, and build
[Guest]: velocity to be able to respond to these things better. And if there's one thing that distinguishes
[Guest]: how we have set about doing relief work in this particular ecosystem, and this is not
[Guest]: just a development family ecosystem, I'm going to say that too. In this approach, you can
[Guest]: round up participation from all sorts of people in all those buckets that I listed earlier,
[Guest]: the corporate guys, the executives, even the CSR guys, and even the industrialists and
[Guest]: the big donors. You can round up all this. But the thing that rounds them up is this
[Guest]: notion of expanding capacity, right? That it can be done, I can do it, I know other
[Guest]: people that can do it. Therefore, if you have additional capacity, it's natural that other
[Guest]: people come to it. And I feel building it in this way has been useful, because it has
[Guest]: left a large number of people with the impression that you can actually do this differently.
[Guest]: I said this a couple of days ago on social media, and a lot of people sort of wrote back
[Guest]: on that. Every state has a government-to-people response to the pandemic. The government is
[Guest]: doing something. You may not always agree with what they're doing, or you may not always
[Guest]: think it's enough, but they're doing something. No government is doing nothing. I mean, no
[Guest]: government is doing even a half-baked job, if you ask me. They're doing something. The
[Guest]: state governments, I make a distinction between government at various levels. And then in
[Guest]: many places, there is also businesses and large people with the capacity to help doing
[Guest]: something because the governments have reached out to them, or they themselves had those
[Guest]: connections anyway, and they're helping in some way.
[Guest]: I think what we've set out to try in Karnataka is distinguished by two other things. We're
[Guest]: doing a people-to-state program. We're saying, we're going to round up people to help the
[Guest]: government. That's one part. It's not a philosophical thing. It's not a position thing. It's just
[Guest]: basically that's what we're going to add this piece. The people are going to help the government.
[Guest]: That's number one. And the fourth piece is the people are going to help each other. Not
[Guest]: in this neighborly scale of, I can do it in my neighborhood kind of thing. I, living in
[Guest]: the southeastern corner of the state, accept responsibility for every last person living
[Guest]: within the state's boundary in Karwar. And therefore, this people-people thing, it has
[Guest]: great potential because now you're saying, let us all of us together in this state, build
[Guest]: these two additional capacities, the people-to-government capacity and the people-to-people capacity.
[Guest]: And I genuinely believe that the velocity of the response depends on these two things
[Guest]: for a very simple reason. There are lots of people. The Sarkar has few people. Businesses
[Guest]: have even fewer people. Communities don't even have what most businesses do. But the
[Guest]: general population, you can never out-compete the general population for sheer numbers.
[Guest]: So the question is, can you tap into the general population? Can you build a response strategy
[Guest]: that taps for sheer volume into that general population? If you build that strategy, it's
[Guest]: effectively, then you're at war with the virus. Everybody's involved. It's like a war at that
[Guest]: point. The virus is everywhere. You have to be everywhere too.
[Amit Varma]: So that's fascinating that there are different sort of questions that come to mind based
[Amit Varma]: on this. And I'll quickly outline them and then you can kind of go through them one by
[Amit Varma]: one. Like one aspect of this, of course, is that you're saying there's a proximate problem,
[Amit Varma]: right? Somewhere people can't get food, they're getting food. Somewhere somebody is not getting
[Amit Varma]: some medicine, you can help them get medicine. Now, initially, you obviously begin by solving
[Amit Varma]: the proximate problems in a piecemeal way that you call up your friend in Chitradurga
[Amit Varma]: and you say, hey, can you get medicine to this guy? Then you realize, no, let's scale
[Amit Varma]: it. Let's build a system of response that is scalable. So now what you're doing is you're
[Amit Varma]: scaling a system of responding to these proximate problems. Now, the other thought that comes
[Amit Varma]: up here is that these are proximate problems that are really symptoms of a deeper problem.
[Amit Varma]: Like if there are scarcities of medicines, or if there was a scarcity of oxygen, for
[Amit Varma]: example, in so many places in the country, why is that there? What is the problem with
[Amit Varma]: migrant labor that they suffer such incredible shocks in terms of not even being able to
[Amit Varma]: feed themselves when something goes wrong. And there are deeper structural problems with
[Amit Varma]: that. And part of the question is identifying those problems and saying, hey, in the long
[Amit Varma]: term, we got to solve those problems. And my intermediate question sort of is that while
[Amit Varma]: scaling up your response to the proximate problems, and I'll ask you to kind of go into
[Amit Varma]: the concrete details of that, because I find that really fascinating. But while saying
[Amit Varma]: that TK, we want to now scale it up so that we can get oxygen to wherever it's required,
[Amit Varma]: we can get food to wherever is required, you scale that up. But how much of that infrastructure
[Amit Varma]: or that ecosystem that you've built to tackle these proximate problems is something that
[Amit Varma]: then is relevant for the future? Like, are we always going to fight symptoms? Or are
[Amit Varma]: these things that we've set up also useful in fighting the sort of bigger problems? And
[Amit Varma]: I've kind of stated my whole set of questions here. But I'm happy if you kind of take them
[Amit Varma]: one by one, like, first of all, do you agree with the characterizations that there are
[Amit Varma]: these proximate problems, and then there are bigger structural issues that are with us
[Amit Varma]: forever. And the proximate problem tomorrow in the next crisis might be some other different
[Amit Varma]: detail, but the structural issues are the same. And moving on from that, maybe we can
[Amit Varma]: talk about how you set about scaling the response, as you said.
[Guest]: So I'll start with this last question, because frankly, it answers most of the others leading
[Guest]: up to you're essentially leading up to a question. And if I answer that question, the rest of
[Guest]: the question, the stuff is built into the answer. One is that the very act of involving
[Guest]: lots more people in a transactional response also gives you the potential to call upon
[Guest]: a much larger ecosystem for more things in the future. Because I know people in Chitradurga,
[Guest]: as a result of doing what we are doing now, I can do something in Chitradurga all the
[Guest]: time in the future. Not always at this intensity, not always at this scale. And it's not just
[Guest]: me, right? It's hundreds of people, thousands of people now know each other in multiple
[Guest]: geographies. And sometimes it's multiple geographies, even in their own cities, in large cities,
[Guest]: that's also important, right?
[Guest]: So the very act of constructing the response in this way builds one part of the social
[Guest]: capacity for responding to further things. The things that they respond to in the future
[Guest]: need not be pandemics and catastrophes, it could be ongoing baseline problems. So that's
[Guest]: one part of it, that 10 people who know each other, because they came together in this
[Guest]: way, now have the capacity to do slightly more, because they know slightly more. So
[Guest]: I'll give you this example. Let's say I do something with UrbanClap. And we'd set up
[Guest]: some kind of infrastructure mechanics training program or service system for public hospitals
[Guest]: as a result of that. The reality is that the result of having had that connection and that
[Guest]: experience is that tomorrow you can say, look, what are the potential of this for some other
[Guest]: problem that you want to take on? So that, I think, is one part of it.
[Guest]: The second part of it is, I think, velocity, right? I make a distinction between velocity
[Guest]: and speed. A lot of things can be done with speed. And governments sometimes have been
[Guest]: doing lots of things in the wrong direction. And therefore, all the speed in the world
[Guest]: is not going to help governments that do those things in the wrong direction, right? So velocity
[Guest]: is important. And velocity is better informed by visibility to the outcome. And that visibility
[Guest]: to the outcome really depends on having multiple eyes and ears in multiple geographies. So
[Guest]: I think that's also a lasting thing. But the third thing is also important. The
[Guest]: question that you're asking is nonetheless important. If you take all of the things that
[Guest]: you want to do and do it only in this transactional way, yes, there is some ongoing social value
[Guest]: because of the connections that evolve, but it's not very great. Which is why in my conversations
[Guest]: in particular with the donor community, the thing that I have been saying is, let's break
[Guest]: this down into all the things that need to be done. And I'll send you that list. I don't
[Guest]: even mind if you put that on your show notes or something. Here are the seven or eight
[Guest]: things that need to be done. This is what needs to be done in terms of in-hospital infrastructure.
[Guest]: This is what needs to be done in terms of long-term care, post-care COVID. This is what
[Guest]: needs to be done in terms of testing. This is what needs to be done in terms of genome
[Guest]: sequencing. This is what needs to be done in terms of ensuring continuing oxygen supply.
[Guest]: This is what needs to be done in terms of ensuring production of oxygen synthesizing
[Guest]: machines in India. This is what needs to be done to get the vaccine production things.
[Guest]: So if you can direct the donor money in particular to things that create greater internal capacity,
[Guest]: it's actually, it's a kind of make in India, if you think about it. And I think that's
[Guest]: important. Actually, make in India has always been important. It's just that the Sarkari
[Guest]: definition of make in India has no place for sell in India. In fact, if you allow people
[Guest]: to sell in India, they would make in India. That's pretty obvious. Anything that you allow
[Guest]: to sell in India, people will eventually make in India. There are 1 billion people here
[Guest]: who can buy, who wouldn't want to make it if they were allowed to sell it. It's because
[Guest]: you don't allow them to sell it, so they don't make it here. So in some way, if you get this
[Guest]: capacity for consumption going, you can actually correct a lot of other problems.
[Guest]: So that's a lasting outcome that the money in particular can enable. And even the relationships
[Guest]: with governments at different levels are things that you can take forward. So I think if you
[Guest]: construct the response in a way that is people-to-people, people-to-government, then what happens, and
[Guest]: I would even go so far as to say that some of the donor money is aligning to this approach
[Guest]: precisely because it now sees this as having potential lasting value, not proven lasting
[Guest]: value. I'd be the first to concede that. But certainly, if you do this through this channel
[Guest]: in certain neighborhoods with local awareness, there's a much greater sense that these things
[Guest]: are being used properly, and the guy's writing checks, not just the big donors, the guy's
[Guest]: writing even CSR checks, want to be assured that their money is being used well. Who can
[Guest]: provide that assurance better than a consumer of the actual thing that you're, if you're
[Guest]: putting up an oxygen plant in Chitradurga? Well, you'd like somebody in Chitradurga other
[Guest]: than the divisional commissioner to sign off on that, right? So I'll get you that connect.
[Guest]: And then you, as the guy who actually gave that plant, can have that connect directly.
[Guest]: So in a way, I think these are the ways to construct that lasting thing. But I'll also
[Guest]: concede that these don't naturally lead to asking, how can you do this in housing and
[Guest]: how can you do this in water supply and sanitation and all of that, and education in particular.
[Guest]: It doesn't naturally lead to that, but it gives you a larger number of connections to
[Guest]: tap into. And if you choose to, you can begin to ask that question too.
[Guest]: Even in this thing itself, I've had, in the middle of a conversation about the response
[Guest]: to a pandemic, there have been people who say, I should separately, I want to talk to
[Guest]: you about what we're doing in education. And I've said separately for now means temporarily.
[Guest]: Separately means four weeks later, when actually when you're out of this stuff. But clearly
[Guest]: it's happening, right? People who are talking to me about delivering oxygen concentrators
[Guest]: are saying, I want to show you what we're doing in this or that. And I'm sure they're
[Guest]: saying that to many others in that conversation as well. It has the potential. If you want
[Guest]: to be deliberate about that, you can do that. I started working with people for finally,
[Guest]: for the first time in India, we are seeing the emergence of a built to rent market for
[Guest]: housing, right? Almost all housing in this India is built to sell. We've never had built
[Guest]: to rent market. The emergence of a built to rent market has great potential for tackling
[Guest]: the affordable housing shortage. So now I know what to do with that if I have bandwidth
[Guest]: for that. And the way to construct bandwidth is to tap into this large ecosystem and say
[Guest]: three guys from that chase this problem.
[Guest]: It's an interesting thing. It's certainly that what you're raising is an important thing.
[Guest]: But I think there's a way to be deliberate about it.
[Amit Varma]: No, no, I agree with you entirely. You know, in my question, I didn't want there to be
[Amit Varma]: an implication that I'm minimizing the importance of, you know, solving the proximate problems.
[Amit Varma]: And I just think that like you said that the long term effects, the unseen effects, as
[Amit Varma]: it were, of building these networks and having people with good intent and a lot of money
[Amit Varma]: actually get to know each other and all of that, I think the spin off effects are fantastic.
[Amit Varma]: And maybe in the future, we'll solve some of our deeper problems. And speaking of deeper,
[Amit Varma]: we got to get deeper into many of the concrete things that you've been doing. But before
[Amit Varma]: that, let's take a quick commercial break. And on the other side of it, we'll get down
[Amit Varma]: to brass tacks.
[Amit Varma]: Have you always wanted to be a writer but never quite gotten down to it? Well, I'd love
[Amit Varma]: to help you. Over the last year, I've enjoyed teaching my online course, the art of clear
[Amit Varma]: writing, and an online community has now sprung up of all my past students. We have workshops,
[Amit Varma]: a newsletter to showcase the work of students and vibrant community interaction that offers
[Amit Varma]: much stimulation, and even some comfort in these difficult times. In the course itself,
[Amit Varma]: through four webinars spread over four weekends, I share all I know about the craft and practice
[Amit Varma]: of clear writing. There are many exercises, much interaction and a lovely and lively community
[Amit Varma]: at the end of it. The course cost rupees 10,000 plus GST, or about $150. And the June classes
[Amit Varma]: begin on June 5. So if you're interested, head on over to register at India uncut.com
[Amit Varma]: slash clear writing. That's India uncut.com slash clear writing. Being a good writer doesn't
[Amit Varma]: require God given talent, just the willingness to work hard and a clear idea of what you
[Amit Varma]: need to do to refine your skills. I can help you.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome back to the scene and the unseen. I'm chatting with Ashwin Mahesh about COVID-19
[Amit Varma]: and relief operations around COVID-19, where so many people surrounded by the pain and
[Amit Varma]: misfortune that they saw all around them and often experienced stepped in to actually help
[Amit Varma]: in whatever way they could. But before we get there, Ashwin wants to talk a little bit
[Amit Varma]: about how we talk to each other, like not in the general idea sense of how we talk to
[Amit Varma]: each other, communication has changed and all that. But down and dirty talk about apps.
[Amit Varma]: He has, Ashwin, I am told has become a fan of telegram, which he forced me to download
[Amit Varma]: a coercive measure I did not resist surprise, surprise. So Ashwin, tell us about telegram
[Amit Varma]: and what's so special about it?
[Guest]: Well, you know, everybody has WhatsApp, right? So that's what the general population is like.
[Guest]: Everybody has WhatsApp. Some people also have telegram. And some people also have signal.
[Unknown]: They have it for a variety of reasons. But some people also have telegram and some people
[Guest]: don't. In the development community, telegram is more common, simply because it's a way
[Guest]: of separating certain conversations from the rest of the thing. And I'm sure I've seen
[Guest]: this even with the bureaucracy, the telegram or signal is a channel in which they communicate
[Guest]: among each other. And remember what I said about people do care, but they have a baseline
[Guest]: of caring that is proximate. And then there is a stuff that is above and beyond that they
[Guest]: can get into. So the people who can get into the other realm are the guys who will say,
[Guest]: if you say to them, download telegram, they'll do it. Right. And it's not coercive. I mean,
[Guest]: but it's they see the point. So one of the interesting things that has happened in the
[Guest]: last two weeks is that a large number of my contacts and networks and lots of other people
[Guest]: are now on telegram. And the reason they're on telegram is that the relief effort is running
[Guest]: on telegram in some ways. I mean, at least the ones that I have great visibility into
[Guest]: the stronger ones are all running on telegram. And every once in a while, people will ask
[Guest]: me, what's your WhatsApp? I say, well, I don't have WhatsApp. I tried it for a day. It didn't
[Guest]: work for me. So I said, this is not for me. So I don't have WhatsApp. And people kind
[Guest]: of find that odd. How can you not have a WhatsApp number? I said, why should it be odd? Because
[Guest]: I never ask you for your Outlook ID or your Gmail ID. I ask you for your email ID. You
[Guest]: can ask me if I have a messaging application and I can tell you that. They don't have interoperability.
[Guest]: So you're asking about individual ones. But in general, you know, I mean, I've got telegram,
[Guest]: I've got signal, I've got Skype, I've got a few other things, but I don't have WhatsApp.
[Guest]: And what is interesting is that all these people at various levels in the last few days
[Guest]: have heard people say, oh, you have telegram. What is that? I mean, I've heard about it.
[Guest]: I know it's like a development. It's like Mozilla for the messaging world. And more
[Guest]: and more people are getting on to it. And that's really what's happening. And then there's
[Guest]: a set of people who never had WhatsApp. And those are extremes, right? Like, whatever.
[Guest]: But there's also a set of people who, even after they've heard about telegram, are not
[Guest]: going to do it. Right? They know that telegram is developed by a messaging, you know, Mozilla
[Guest]: like community. It actually, their goal as a community is partly to build a certain kind
[Guest]: of technology with certain values built into it. And these values are different from what
[Guest]: a Facebook or a Jack Ma would build into their products. But they still think, yeah, but
[Guest]: I really want to be able to talk to lots of people. Because lots of people have WhatsApp.
[Guest]: I know I want to have WhatsApp. And I can't have more than one app. Therefore, really,
[Guest]: I want to have WhatsApp. And really, that's the analogy that I see.
[Guest]: There's a general population. There is a tippable population. There's an extreme population
[Guest]: that didn't even need tipping because they've sort of grown up this way. And then there's
[Guest]: a large sort of, you know, distributions around the median of each of these kinds of things.
[Guest]: And definitely what I'm seeing in the last two weeks is a significant number of people
[Guest]: getting on to telegram for the first time and joining lots and lots of groups on that.
[Guest]: So it was kind of in my mind, a kind of analogy to what you see in the larger space as well.
[Guest]: And every day, I sort of encounter people making these choices for the first time. It's
[Guest]: not about telegram, joining the larger relief effort for the first time. It's the first
[Guest]: time they've been tipped over into joining this community. It's kind of interesting to
[Guest]: see how enthusiastic they are about it and how they jump into connecting in ways that
[Guest]: they always knew were possible. But it's now real for them that they've actually tried
[Guest]: it. Okay, now we can sort of continue with that.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, no, I'll just kind of quickly respond to this and say that I don't know how permanent
[Amit Varma]: this is. Because you know, a while back, there was this move where everybody wanted to move
[Amit Varma]: from WhatsApp and I downloaded Signal for that. So I face this dilemma that I run this
[Amit Varma]: online writing course, and I'm now in my 13th month. I started it last year when lockdown
[Amit Varma]: began. And I've had more than like 1100 students so far, and out of which about 650 are part
[Amit Varma]: of this writing community that kind of continued and it's a volunteer community, it runs itself,
[Amit Varma]: we do workshops, they give each other prompts, there are reading groups for fiction and nonfiction,
[Amit Varma]: a lot of stuff is happening, and it's completely free of charge for everyone who's done the
[Amit Varma]: course. So it's about 650 people. Now the big limitation is how do we talk your email
[Amit Varma]: is like your home base. But WhatsApp is where most of the chatter takes place, but they
[Amit Varma]: have a limit of 256 people per group. So the 256 who happen to be on are talking all the
[Amit Varma]: time there are like 200 messages a day they're discussing writing is useful is great. But
[Amit Varma]: how do you involve everyone and we've tried experiments like, like one medium that I really
[Amit Varma]: would like to make ubiquitous for the group is discord, which is also a way through which
[Amit Varma]: creators stay in touch with their audiences. And I love it because you can you can do little
[Amit Varma]: audio rooms that you can do presentations that you can have zoomish kind of sessions
[Amit Varma]: there. It's really an interesting space, you know, I stopped using signal after I downloaded
[Amit Varma]: it and went on for a bit. And I probably won't use telegram much. And part of the reason
[Amit Varma]: is that network effects, right, you just you will just end up having more people available
[Amit Varma]: to you on WhatsApp, although I exited a whole bunch of groups, because, you know, a lot
[Amit Varma]: of WhatsApp groups, if they're not family WhatsApp groups, which are just sending forwards
[Amit Varma]: all the time, also disintegrate into kind of shitting on other people, you know, and
[Amit Varma]: nothing productive at all. And people just do that the whole freaking day you're gossiping
[Amit Varma]: about people who aren't there. And which, you know, in a sense also happens on parts
[Amit Varma]: of social media, which I just hate. But anyway, data side apart, I mean, I don't know who
[Amit Varma]: will give us relief from that. But I'm not as optimistic as you are about telegram, because
[Amit Varma]: I know that I got on because you asked me to get on. But I don't think I'll stay on
[Amit Varma]: to be very honest, because mental bandwidth is limited, which is another reason enough
[Amit Varma]: people don't participate in relief, like over here, they may be because everything seems
[Amit Varma]: so urgent. But once this has receded, then the old normal will be the new normal again.
[Amit Varma]: But I hope there are some changes which linger on. But I think listeners must now be a little
[Amit Varma]: exasperated that ye log bahut high level baate kar rahe hain, get down to the point. Let's
[Amit Varma]: talk about COVID relief.
[Guest]: Okay, how shall I begin? So there are, like I said, I sent you that spectrum of things
[Guest]: that need to be looked at, that covers, you know, a very large number of things. But let's
[Guest]: start with the stuff that is needed immediately, right? You've got a situation on the ground,
[Guest]: in which decades of deficit in health infrastructure, let's focus on health infrastructure, decades
[Guest]: of deficit in health infrastructure, and weaknesses in how quickly government can do anything
[Guest]: have led to a situation where the virus has overwhelmed you. You don't have 2x demand
[Guest]: in any facility, you have 10x demand, 20x demand in many facilities. So the immediate
[Guest]: requirement is, start building that infrastructure back up as quickly as possible. And you identify
[Guest]: all the pieces of that infrastructure. It is what it is, you know, frankly, I'd never
[Guest]: heard of like PSA plants and oxygen cylinders and all of these kinds of things being used
[Guest]: in hospital environment, but it is what it is, you make a list of all the stuff, you
[Guest]: figure out who has what, you figure out who doesn't have what, which is actually a much
[Guest]: longer list. And you say, okay, look, there's no way you can meet this demand. But you start
[Guest]: to pick places where you feel you can deliver some of these things reasonably quickly, because
[Guest]: you know where they are available. You know donors who are willing to pay for it. And
[Guest]: you know, if you can connect the dots between all of them, stuff will get moving on the
[Guest]: ground. Of course, in due course, large donors will buy even more of this. It is what it
[Guest]: is. So the first thing you do is you start the supply chain in some way, you enable the
[Guest]: supply chain to say, we're not going to buy, but we'll help you buy. You don't know anything
[Guest]: about cylinders. But because we have helped so many people buy cylinders, we know something
[Guest]: about cylinders, and we know what to ask and how to negotiate and all of that stuff. You
[Guest]: don't know anything about the government, but because we talk to the government all
[Guest]: the time, we have some idea of who's asking for what from every district. I have a long
[Guest]: list of requirements from every district commissioner. So we'll do the best we can in matching money,
[Guest]: materials, and need. So you start that relay. And you do it for various product lines, oxygen
[Guest]: cylinders, concentrators, N95 masks, whatever, some seven or eight things like that are there.
[Guest]: You run that thing for as many product lines as you can. And you say, now I've got a functioning
[Guest]: procurement channel. It's actually interesting. It's a channel in which you don't do anything,
[Guest]: but other than enable the channel, everybody else does what their individual, the donor
[Guest]: gives money, the manufacturer makes the product, the public administration receives and indexes.
[Guest]: You don't do anything, but you are present everywhere. You're present in the conversation
[Guest]: with the donor. You're present in the premises of the manufacturer to check out what the
[Guest]: hell that guy is doing, because you can't really start sending the stuff before you
[Guest]: understand what on earth is going on. And you are present in the local office of the
[Guest]: DC or the Taluk hospital where the thing is actually being handed over. And so you have
[Guest]: that. You build this thing. And after a while, people start to figure out if you're not working
[Guest]: with one of the large procurers, there is actually only one way to get materials to
[Guest]: happen. Either you must know somebody personally who on a private basis can do something, or
[Guest]: you have to reach out to a channel which is enabling this and say, enable my need also.
[Guest]: So we started getting requests from other states. So Tamil Nadu would say, can you do
[Guest]: this for us too? And Andhra Pradesh, Telangana, various states start to say, can you do this
[Guest]: for us too? And we usually say, if you have some people on the ground who will also participate
[Guest]: in this exercise, and who will also help us identify more places from which procurement
[Guest]: can happen, and more donors who will cough up money for all of these kinds of things,
[Guest]: we will keep adding the volunteer teams that will carry out the enabling role for you also,
[Guest]: and you'll get more and more things. In this, there are two kinds of challenges. One is,
[Guest]: this whole process has lots of, I don't want to say gray areas, but it has lots of uncertainty.
[Guest]: You don't even really know many things. And sometimes the guys who can do this, I mean,
[Guest]: these, especially certain products like cylinders and all, they are usable across multiple industries.
[Guest]: They're not just, you know, there may be oxygen cylinders, but a typical oxygen cylinder is
[Guest]: usable, not just in a hospital. It's usable in many other settings as well. And the typical
[Guest]: equipment like that has life of 60 years, 70 years, 80 years, whatever, several decades,
[Guest]: certainly. The typical business in India doesn't have that kind of life. So they tend to go
[Guest]: through multiple industries. They tend to have passed between multiple hands. So there's
[Guest]: a certain system of saying, refurbish them, get them audited, get them tested, put them
[Guest]: back in service, only if you're confident that you can, blah, blah, blah.
[Guest]: Getting all of this to move suddenly one day is not easy, simply because various guys are
[Guest]: used to saying, ah, in a month I can do 200 of this. Suddenly the system is going to various
[Guest]: people like that and say, can you do 2000 this month? Right? Nobody who's been doing
[Guest]: 100 cylinders a month can suddenly do 2000, not only because of capital, because that's
[Guest]: all it is, the raw material, the sourcing, the valves, the regulator. By the time you
[Guest]: get all this stuff and do it, it's just going to take forever. Then there will be some truck
[Guest]: driver who will have his own constraints. He's a, yehi gadi hai, isme jaayega, itna
[Guest]: hi aa jaayega. I can put only, you may have ordered 200 cylinders, but I can only put
[Guest]: 180. And then you'll encounter situations which are truly moral problems. Two people
[Guest]: want the same thing. Both are related to saving lives. Right? You have to do something. You
[Guest]: can take the view that as a practical matter, I can only do this with one person. And therefore
[Guest]: I have to let the other person go in some way to say, look, you find some other thing
[Guest]: that can be helpful to you. We can't do that. You're not exactly playing God at that level,
[Guest]: but you are sort of making choices that are not easy. It's not easy. Then you have even
[Guest]: more morally complex problem. You know that the situation is desperate in one place. But
[Guest]: the intermediary who is representing that desperation and saying, please give us this
[Guest]: thing. You don't trust the guy. You don't trust the guy. Okay. You think if you give
[Guest]: this to this guy, he will sell it in the black market. But you know that behind him is this
[Guest]: massively desperate group. You can either say, I'll try to go around the guy and find
[Guest]: the blah, blah, and I'll invest time in that. Or you can say, I can't do this thing. It
[Guest]: has uncertainty written all over it. Even if this group has higher requirement, it is
[Guest]: better that we give this stuff to some place where we feel confident that it will be used
[Guest]: in a hospital facility without getting into some luffa. And also that you want to be accountable
[Guest]: to the people who are spending this money. They're not giving it to me. They're actually
[Guest]: giving it to the manufacturers. But still, you know, they're giving it to you because
[Guest]: they trust you. I mean, they're giving it to the manufacturer because they trust you.
[Guest]: In a situation like that, you have accountability. Whether it is legal accountability or not,
[Guest]: it's basically your word that is driving the system in some way. So there's a moral accountability
[Guest]: for that. So what happens in a situation, you're making a choice not to send something
[Guest]: somewhere, even though you know for a fact that it's... And sometimes people in your
[Guest]: own sort of circle that is trying to sort of help all this, it becomes a conversation
[Guest]: in that circle. How can we do that? Right? How can we do that? And then you have sometimes
[Unknown]: what will happen, the manufacturer himself is aware of a much higher need because so
[Guest]: many people are reaching out to him as well. So there's a moral dilemma at that point.
[Guest]: And also some things that he will say, you know, I've been working continuously for 28
[Guest]: hours. I need a break. I can't just go on making stuff just because the need is very
[Guest]: high. And sometimes the payments won't happen on time. It is what it is. Everybody wants
[Guest]: advance payment, but sometimes it's just the way it is. So you have to sort of say, you
[Guest]: have to do like a combination of the Bhagavad Gita and something else. I don't know what
[Guest]: you'd call it. I sort of reduced it to three sentences. Dharma is subtle. That's all it
[Guest]: is. Dharma is subtle. Morality is a luxury of peacetime. Shut the fuck up and do it.
[Guest]: So but that's all it is. The first two are true. You're trying to say to the guy, I don't
[Guest]: know the answers to these questions any more than you do. I, like you, have been put in
[Guest]: a difficult situation by the overall catastrophe that all of us find ourselves in and by our
[Guest]: own voluntary decisions to do something about it. This is not a decision that you can execute
[Guest]: without a certain degree of, what's the word? Whatever's the opposite of equanimity. I don't
[Guest]: know what that is, right? That gumption is what I would say. If you don't have a degree
[Guest]: of gumption about doing this kind of thing, you can't do it. That's how it is, right?
[Guest]: And I think for a lot of people who are joining this stuff, if you do this for four weeks,
[Guest]: it's more work experience than what you can do, get in a company or a job working for
[Guest]: two years. And that's actually true because autonomy comes with the responsibility. The
[Guest]: demand is way more than anywhere the group can meet. So you're all over the place doing
[Guest]: all sorts of things. Ultimately, over a period of time, you're just settling down into a
[Guest]: rhythm that says, I know who can close what, who I know in a trustable way, not just trust
[Guest]: as in a probity, but trust as in he's done it before, right? And then lots of challenges
[Guest]: will come and you'll get reminded of various things that sort of, I mean, sometimes you
[Guest]: get to a depressing situation where you'll say, should we try to do all these things?
[Guest]: I'm going to give you an example. I'm not going to tell, sometimes I can't tell you
[Guest]: the specifics. That's just life. There was a hospital in which some people died because
[Guest]: of some thing, some equipment just not working. And this is like, I mean, it's not in Karnataka,
[Guest]: but we were anyway trying to help. But there was also a sense in the administration
[Guest]: there that we don't want to be seen as accepting private sector help. So it's a calculus inside
[Guest]: the political leadership in that space. It's whatever it is. I don't want to get into why,
[Guest]: but that's what you're hearing. You have gone to the trouble of transporting something at
[Guest]: great combination of effort and expense to the doorstep of that facility. The administrator
[Guest]: of that facility says to you, off the record, we need it. We just can't take it. Right?
[Guest]: Now you have to say, put it back on the truck, move it. I'm not in this. I can't solve this
[Guest]: problem. I can't solve this problem, but it happens. Then there are all these, there's
[Guest]: a lot of buffoonery also, just complete buffoonery. Lots of people have collected this concentrate,
[Guest]: kept them in their own properties as insurance. They think that an oxygen concentrator in
[Guest]: their clubhouse is going to really do something for them. They have no idea this is a post-COVID
[Guest]: medical device to be used in a hospital facility. Lots of guys have bought five liter. And it's
[Guest]: not just like ordinary guys who you think will not know enough to distinguish. Some
[Guest]: of the major donors have bought the wrong thing. And they bought thousands of it. And
[Guest]: then people go to the government or to somebody who's helping, like me, and say, somebody
[Guest]: will call me up once and say, I have bought two oxygen plants. They're coming in the next
[Guest]: two, three days. Well, what should I do with them? I'm like, dude, you bought an oxygen
[Guest]: plant, right? You didn't buy a cylinder. You didn't buy something that's like, it's not
[Guest]: off the shelf. You bought something that is actually equipment that needs installation
[Guest]: in the premises of a facility and integration through piping and other connectivity to the
[Guest]: service provided. And you didn't think of this thing before you got it, right? And now
[Guest]: you want to know where it should be put. But there are people like that. There is stuff
[Guest]: like that in the country. It's just, I think about 10, 15% of the money is just floating
[Guest]: around in completely useless stuff. And if you channelize, if that had been channelized
[Guest]: properly, a lot of things could have been done differently. And then there are guys
[Guest]: who will say, you will have your paying agency, right? I have several who can help because
[Guest]: many NGOs can help pay many bills. That person will say, you have to fill out some paper.
[Guest]: You have to become a registered vendor in our system. You have to become, you know,
[Unknown]: everybody's got a system for registering this country, like this mindless amount of data
[Guest]: collection, right? I want to know everything about you before I help you, but I'm not going
[Guest]: to tell you whether I'm going to help you. And in the process, since you're asking so
[Guest]: much information about me, I'll also ask you similar amounts of information about you.
[Guest]: So the net result is that we exchange massive amounts of information with each other, but
[Guest]: the transaction itself might not happen. There's a lot of that kind of stuff too, but the need
[Guest]: is on the ground all the time right now, right? And some people will go out of their way to
[Guest]: say, take a badminton. It'll sort itself out. We'll send it. You deal with this later.
[Guest]: I feel this challenge of deciding what to give where is going to become morally more
[Guest]: complex as the virus goes into the villages. We have done something in the villages, which
[Guest]: has many consequences. The first consequence is, I'll tell you also what we have done.
[Guest]: The first thing that happened is that in many states, there was a wholesale transfer of
[Guest]: the health staff who are working at these primary levels, you know, PHCs and community
[Guest]: health centers in particular, to the district and taluk hospitals and to the city hospitals.
[Guest]: So the thinking I think at that time was, this virus is attacking the cities. We have
[Guest]: to stop the virus in the cities. If we don't stop it in the cities, you will never be able
[Guest]: to deal with this thing if it hits the countryside. But the thing is, you didn't stop it in the
[Guest]: cities, despite all of this. And of course, it was never possible to stop it this way
[Guest]: in the city anyway. And so while you did all that you thought you were doing to stop it
[Guest]: in the city, the virus went to the countryside. Now in the countryside, you have all these
[Guest]: PHCs and CHCs, which have been denuded of their staff. And several of them have thousands
[Guest]: of COVID positive cases in their jurisdiction. So there are PHCs out there who say, in my
[Guest]: jurisdiction, about 2,000 people are COVID positive. I mean, like, 2,000 people being
[Guest]: COVID positive in a jurisdiction is like, we also have roads, we also have pipes. At
[Guest]: the moment, it's become ubiquitous in some way, right? There are several places like
[Guest]: that. But there's only one person there. And they don't have anything like the kind of
[Guest]: equipment that they need, even to do the sorting. And the kind of thing that was organized in
[Guest]: Mumbai, where ward level committees figured out how to triage and separate various people.
[Guest]: In theory, a village community could do that. But in practice, they don't know how to do
[Guest]: it. Nobody's actually there to train them, even the first day, to give one day of training
[Guest]: to get that going. The capacity to intervene in the rural communities, the small communities,
[Guest]: and the remote communities is just completely not there. As the virus has moved into those
[Guest]: communities, the sheer terror of... I mean, the biologists will tell you that this is
[Guest]: not a lethally infectious virus. As viruses go, this thing is manageable. But it's hit
[Guest]: a very large number of people. And those people are running into a completely missing infrastructure
[Guest]: for support. And they're doing it in volumes that the system itself is overwhelmed by.
[Guest]: This is all to one side of the story. And then you're trying to do something really
[Guest]: quick in the middle of all of this stuff. And then there are these technical issues.
[Guest]: Not technical issues, reality technical issues. I don't know what you'd call them. I'll give
[Guest]: you an example. A typical hospital runs on the assumption that the majority of people
[Guest]: in the hospital don't need oxygen support. Some of about, yeah, I don't know, let's say
[Guest]: 60, 70% of the people can just need general ward level support. There's a bunch of people
[Guest]: that need oxygen in a highly attentive unit, and maybe a small percentage that need an
[Guest]: ICU bed. And even if you have an oxygen plant, typically it is set up under that assumption
[Guest]: that there is a distribution of requirement, therefore you get a plant of a certain capacity.
[Guest]: Now you're saying we need to buy PSAs and put it in every hospital. Because the hospitals
[Guest]: are all overwhelmed with people who need ICU beds and high attention beds. But the problem
[Guest]: is now you need a different kind of plant. The plant that you need is not to cater to
[Guest]: 15 or 20% of the beds being occupied by these kinds of patients. But then you had two kinds
[Guest]: of problems. One, the piping infrastructure inside the hospital is not set up for this
[Guest]: kind of external thing. So there are pressure-related issues in some cases. But equally, this becomes
[Guest]: a problem for the donor community. The donor community also starts asking, okay, I'm going
[Guest]: to buy this PSA plant, which can cater to a very large number of whatever. But actually
[Guest]: this is overkill for what is needed in the post-COVID scenario. So should we really be
[Guest]: buying this? Shouldn't we be doing something else that is more modular, can be shifted
[Guest]: somewhere? So essentially you spend time trying to sort the answer to that question. There
[Guest]: may be a reasonable way to do that, but maybe you can do a sequence of a serial of five
[Guest]: small plants instead of one large plant. There are things you can do. But this is one part
[Guest]: of it. What I'm trying to say is that the infrastructure's readiness to absorb what
[Guest]: you are giving itself is having certain complexities in it. Then in the infrastructure side, there's
[Guest]: a distinction you have to make between storage infrastructure and the materials that get
[Guest]: delivered into that storage. So if you have an oxygen cylinder or an oxygen plant, an
[Guest]: LMO, liquid metal oxygen plant, somebody has to take oxygen to it. The oxygen supply cannot
[Guest]: suddenly increase. Yes, the government is doing something by saying talk to the steel
[Guest]: manufacturers, talk to the cement manufacturers and increase the oxygen supply. But what this
[Guest]: means is until you find a more stable and alternate source of oxygen supply, the steel
[Guest]: and cement industries are shut down. In some way, you are caught in the choices that you
[Guest]: have made to address one problem because those very choices have made it impossible to solve
[Guest]: another problem as well. And there's an undersupply. If you need 10 of something, even with these
[Guest]: kinds of intervention, you'll only have six. In some sense, the government has been put
[Guest]: in a very difficult position of saying some people are going to get oxygen, other people
[Guest]: are not going to get oxygen. That's all it is. And even if you say, well, all hospitals
[Guest]: are getting oxygen in some level, that is only because the demand at the hospital is
[Guest]: 300, they're admitting only 25. Those 25 are getting oxygen. You are really about the depth
[Guest]: of 10 or 15 people in a hospital, 25 people in a hospital. Those are the 25 people that
[Guest]: managed to get into the hospital. The demand at that very hospital was 300. There isn't
[Guest]: a new story about what happened to the 275 who didn't get into the hospital because they
[Guest]: died one by one at home, many of them. And that number is probably more than the 25 that
[Guest]: died in the hospital. So you have a situation in which your record collection about the
[Guest]: casualties is vastly dependent on the infrastructure, but the infrastructure is rejecting the majority
[Guest]: of the people that come to it. So your data is all wrong. So when people are like, you
[Guest]: know, you've seen Shamika's curve, those diagrams and all of those kinds of things, you know,
[Guest]: those bars and charts that keep coming. I think as data analysis, okay, it's a technique.
[Guest]: If you want to learn some techniques like that, it's not a bad thing to follow that
[Guest]: and learn some techniques. But as comprehension of reality, I don't even like, you know, I'm
[Guest]: actually looking to see, is there a nice visualization strategy about data in this thing? I'm not
[Guest]: even looking at what the data is. I don't believe that data at all. And lots of people
[Guest]: will tell you, no, no, no, how can you say that? This is all official. And I'm saying,
[Guest]: of course, everything is official. Have you seen the officials? Right? Right? They themselves
[Guest]: will tell you, sir, this is what we can put on paper because this is what is on paper.
[Guest]: This is not the reality, right? So that is, this is all, I mean, I'll pause here. I don't
[Guest]: know if you want to have any questions to this sort of thing. This is a complex environment
[Guest]: in which you're first trying to intervene. You as a lay person from the outside, I mean,
[Guest]: fortunately, in a group like the one that we're constructing, there are hospital administrators
[Guest]: who have done this job before in their own hospitals. So they have some knowledge like
[Guest]: Ashwin Naik from Vatsalya, for example. He's done this job before, right? People like that
[Guest]: who've done some job, someone you know has run a hospital. So you're counting on their
[Guest]: expertise to say, this can be done, that can be done, and all of that stuff. But the vast
[Guest]: majority of people doing this stuff have never been anywhere near a hospital. I mean, at
[Guest]: some level, the generalist leadership of the administrative services have also never generally
[Guest]: been before in front of a hospital. So it's in that sense, not very different. But it
[Guest]: also complicates the problem even more. No one really knows what the right thing to be
[Guest]: done is. You're just learning that on the fly, approximating it, and meeting a small
[Guest]: portion of even that need while you're doing it. That's the current situation. Meanwhile,
[Guest]: the thing is flaring out of hand. And the science, I mean, I don't trust what they say
[Guest]: at the science level at all. Because if you see, the genome guys around the country are
[Guest]: telling you about 20,000 sequences have been done in India since the pandemic started.
[Guest]: And in most states, they've not done more than a few hundred, right? How the hell can
[Guest]: you tell what this virus looks like today if you're not actually doing the genome sequencing
[Guest]: day in and day out to understand what it's mutating into? But there are also some guys
[Guest]: who are saying, this has been a remarkably stable virus. It hasn't mutated very much
[Guest]: in the conventional sense or extent of how much mutations happen. This virus hasn't done
[Guest]: too much. So there's a hope. It's a reasonable expectation, more than hope, that the vaccines
[Guest]: that are already out there should continue to work for even the mutations that have already
[Guest]: happened or the ones that we realistically think could happen. That's a bit of a hope
[Guest]: in the sense, you really don't know that to be true, but maybe there's a statistical certainty
[Guest]: of some of that. But I'd still like to see the sequencing done all the time.
[Guest]: The vaccine rollout is another problem, right? The vaccine rollout is just basic mathematics.
[Guest]: 1.4 billion people, you know, leave out the children. That gives you, what, 900 million
[Guest]: people that you need to vaccinate, two doses, 1.8 billion doses. The capacity inside the
[Guest]: country is not more than 70 million doses per month. Government isn't really giving
[Guest]: enough money to boost that capacity to these guys. They might get to 100 million doses
[Guest]: a month by August. At 100 million doses a month, you're going to get to complete vaccination
[Guest]: only in the middle or late part of 2022. Of course, you could introduce more vaccines
[Guest]: into that thing, but that itself is a process. And the process of saying this is approved,
[Guest]: not approved, I can buy, you can buy, states can buy. And also the reporting of this has
[Guest]: been really bad. There have been many, many, many reports saying we are running the world's
[Guest]: largest vaccination program. Of course, we'll run the world's largest anything. You've got
[Guest]: the world's largest number of people. Anything that has to do with people count, you will
[Guest]: be running the world's largest number of that, right? And then by some indications, actually,
[Guest]: the Chinese population is already either close to or lower than our population. So we might
[Guest]: actually have a situation where the population is bigger than the Chinese population. To
[Guest]: say that you're the world's largest program for this or that makes no sense. What percentage
[Guest]: of the people that need to receive this have received it? That makes sense. If you have
[Guest]: the world's largest program for something, how is it that so many other countries are
[Guest]: finishing their vaccinations before you are? Because you have a lot more people. That's
[Guest]: all it is. But the second level reporting is not happening in the media at all. The
[Guest]: media is quite happy to report the headline. The headline is often coming from a press
[Guest]: release. And in fact, I've seen one other thing, which is that the first three paragraphs
[Guest]: of any news article are simply restatements of each other. Amit Verma said today that
[Guest]: 70,000 vaccines will be available by the middle of September. In only a short period of four
[Guest]: months, this means that India will have increased its capacity. There's no real content there
[Guest]: except what's in the first sentence, but you can write that for three and a half paragraphs.
[Guest]: There's a lot of that because they're just doing their 300 words or 400 words in the
[Guest]: newspaper alone. So I think I should stop. I'm telling you a very large number of complex
[Guest]: cities to deal with. But I can do this for three hours.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, you should. I wish I could make you do this for three more hours. So lots to process
[Amit Varma]: here. But let me sort of come to sort of restate a theoretical condition that you spoke about
[Amit Varma]: and ask you to sort of get more concrete about it to aid our understanding, which is, of
[Amit Varma]: course, a problem of triaging, where you said that, look, we're making moral choices all
[Amit Varma]: the time. We are surrounded by incredible scarcity, not a little scarcity, but an incredible
[Amit Varma]: scarcity. If there are 25 beds in a hospital, you have 300 people who are fighting for those.
[Amit Varma]: And obviously, the data will only capture to which of those 25 died when they did not
[Amit Varma]: get oxygen, not about the 275 left out. That's a great point. Now, the thing with this triaging
[Amit Varma]: is I completely get it that, let's say that you get a donor, donor gives you money to
[Amit Varma]: get cylinders made and to have oxygen put in them. But you have X number of cylinders,
[Amit Varma]: you know, A wants him, B wants him, C wants him, maybe you can save more lives in C, but
[Amit Varma]: probabilistic estimates come in because your interface with C is not so reliable, you don't
[Amit Varma]: know how much likely it is to get there. So you have to take all of that into account.
[Amit Varma]: Plus, what you don't always realize is that, you know, what is useful information in the
[Amit Varma]: fog of war, there is so much information flowing around, like in the early part of the second
[Amit Varma]: wave, there were all these calls being amplified on social media for say plasma, which we know
[Amit Varma]: does not work for remdesivir, which most of the time does not work. It's a very limited
[Amit Varma]: use case. And in no use case does it even delay fatalities or seriousness, for example.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, it's possible that there is misdirection of effort and resources over
[Amit Varma]: there. So my question is about, you know, I mean, obviously, you need to think probabilistically
[Amit Varma]: and think about where you can get, I won't say bang for the buck, but the most positive
[Amit Varma]: impact in terms of being able to save lives for whatever effort you can put in. But before
[Amit Varma]: you do that, you need information. There is this fog of information. So two questions
[Amit Varma]: really, one is, how does that evolve? Like do you develop what economists will call fast
[Amit Varma]: and frugal heuristics for guiding decision making? It's on the basis of these things
[Amit Varma]: that I make these decisions. How much does that fog of war in terms of information affect
[Amit Varma]: you? And secondly, I'd really like you to get concrete without taking names of people
[Amit Varma]: or institutions, perhaps, but just to give us a better sense of actual choices that you
[Amit Varma]: have faced in the field and how you've resolved them. And, you know, the dilemmas contained
[Amit Varma]: within. Can you can you bring that alive for us?
[Guest]: OK, so let's take the first one, the question about information. So we have a system of
[Guest]: saying there are needs and there are verified needs. Every need has the potential to be
[Guest]: a verified need. And just because you have not verified them doesn't mean it's not a
[Guest]: legitimate need. But one of the moral choices you have to make is that you're only going
[Guest]: to respond to verified needs. So those are very real. You have asked for something. Someone
[Guest]: else has asked for something else. I know for a fact that your ask is legitimate. I
[Guest]: have only one of those things anyway. So I would say, look, I don't need to ask the other
[Guest]: guy if his need is legitimate. I only have one. I know Amit's need is legitimate. I have
[Guest]: verified it. So give the thing to Amit. So that happens all the time because you're dealing
[Guest]: only with verifiable needs. The second thing is, you know somebody on the ground who is
[Guest]: telling you the situation on the ground is different from what the administration is
[Guest]: telling you. This happens too. It's not because the administration is misleading you. Sometimes
[Guest]: there's a risk of that. But by and large, that's not the issue. The administration is
[Guest]: telling you something. Typically, what will happen in a state government is if you say,
[Guest]: what do you need? If you go to Andhra Pradesh state government and say, what do you need?
[Guest]: They will give you a list of requirements from every district commissioner. If you need
[Guest]: 10 cylinders or 15 concentrators or 10 ventilators, when you fill out that document asking for
[Guest]: those things, you will add a zero to every one of them. I guarantee it. Nobody will ask
[Guest]: for exactly what they need. They'll always ask for a lot more than what they need. And
[Guest]: of course, now the donor community is chasing very large numbers of these kinds of things
[Guest]: being asked for because those are the official requests. The official requests are for things
[Guest]: that are in some cases far in excess of what is actually needed. But in some cases, that
[Guest]: many will not be needed because everybody's chasing that same list. I have seen that there's
[Guest]: one list that's floating around, which is this global sourcing of PSA plants. The guys
[Guest]: who wrote that list, I got that list directly from them. But the number of people who have
[Guest]: incidentally brought that list to my attention saying, I got it from so-and-so, I got it
[Guest]: from so-and-so, and who genuinely believe they've found another set of sources from
[Guest]: which you can buy, it's very high. So you're spending a lot of time just comparing some
[Guest]: small things and saying, this is the same thing, this is the same thing. And then the
[Guest]: strategy, here's the thing. You're trying to buy something from a certain plant in Korea.
[Guest]: I'm giving you an example. I know for a fact that somebody is trying to buy the plant itself.
[Guest]: You understand? I can tell you that, but I have no certainty that the person is actually
[Guest]: going to complete buying that plant either. But if I tell you that, you're going to say,
[Guest]: oh, maybe I shouldn't follow this lead because if somebody else is going to buy out the whole
[Guest]: plant, when am I going to get anything done over here?
[Guest]: So what I'm trying to say is there are these kinds of dilemmas, which are not quite gray
[Guest]: areas, but which are simply choices at various points. But there are also gray areas. The
[Guest]: reality is that nothing is without a gray area. And in those, you really have to ask
[Guest]: yourself, are you willing to go through the gray area because it is necessary? Or is there
[Guest]: a way of beating down the extent of the gray so that, frankly, instead of 60% gray, it's
[Guest]: only 10% gray? At some level, Amit, I can't really talk about that. And you can understand
[Guest]: why it's not, because it's a lot of other people making choices like that as well.
[Guest]: But in some ways, it is necessary. That's all it is. It's necessary that when you are
[Guest]: buying a scarce product or a service, it is again and again necessary to say only some
[Guest]: people will get it. When the process of making that thing itself has 10 steps. But I'll put
[Guest]: it to you like this. If one of those steps will take seven days and the rest of the steps
[Guest]: can be done in seven hours. And if somebody says to you, sir, that one step that takes
[Guest]: seven days, it's not necessary. And you also know for a fact that the center at which that
[Guest]: seventh step is doing something can only do a very, very small subset of what is brought
[Guest]: to it. So you have a situation on the ground where very large numbers of people are doing
[Guest]: what it takes to save lives. There is no standard operating procedure to save lives. This is
[Guest]: the reality. Since there is no standard operating procedure to save lives, you have to do what
[Guest]: you think is helpful to save lives. Is it possible for people to turn around and say
[Guest]: you did not follow the standard operating procedure? Yes, it is possible. Would you
[Guest]: save more lives if you did not follow the standard operating procedure? Who knows? I
[Guest]: have no idea of knowing that. I'm not the expert in these things. It's not even my job.
[Guest]: I mean, the number of times in which within the group, we have said to each other, we
[Guest]: shouldn't be doing this. We are not the people to do this is very high. And that's really
[Guest]: an odd thing because, you know, you are procuring an oximeter or an oxygen concentrator. Frankly,
[Guest]: I couldn't have recognized that thing for several days after we got started on this
[Guest]: thing. I was only hoping that the guys doing the actual procurement had seen that thing
[Guest]: in some way. But what I'm saying is, you're carrying out a lot of stuff of which you have
[Guest]: only limited knowledge. And you are completely aware that this could lead, at the very least,
[Guest]: to loss of money. And I'll give you another example of stuff. There are guys who have
[Guest]: bought equipment, thinking that it serves a certain capacity, a certain purpose, and
[Guest]: they have kept it for that purpose. This equipment is not at all for that purpose. In fact, if
[Guest]: you leave it there, their building probably will blow up in a little while.
[Guest]: For example?
[Guest]: A liquid oxygen tank in your basement, right? Okay, I'm not going to say who has, but there
[Guest]: are people who bought a liquid oxygen tank. I think they were not ill-meaning or stupid
[Guest]: or anything like that. Somebody somewhere is telling you this can provide value. And
[Guest]: even if that is true, actually, look at it the other side. Let's say that it is true
[Guest]: that there is a way to safely keep a liquid oxygen tank in your basement and give yourself
[Guest]: some capacity for oxygen if necessary. Even if that were true, I'm willing to bet that
[Guest]: the procedure for keeping a liquid oxygen tank in your basement does not exist. Frankly,
[Guest]: there's no procedure for saying I'm going to keep this in my basement. And certainly
[Guest]: the health department has not, quote unquote, sanctioned this. But you know it's happening.
[Guest]: And you know people are handling certain equipment who have not been certified to handle that
[Guest]: equipment. You know that, right? But there's nobody else to handle that equipment. So should
[Guest]: you stop it? Should you say, well, I'm not going to give you, should you give equipment
[Guest]: to people who have had no certification at all to handle that equipment? That's a real
[Guest]: choice, right? Because you don't know the number of people, the number of people who
[Guest]: are certified to use that equipment is vastly smaller than the number of people needed to
[Guest]: handle the equipment today. So should you be buying and giving equipment to people who
[Guest]: have no certification to handle it? If the answer is yes, you can't fight the pandemic.
[Guest]: I'm giving you a sense of the kind of choices that you're making, that you're having to
[Guest]: make. The other thing is some districts have greater capacity than other districts. So
[Guest]: this is an interesting question in the whole spectrum. Should you do things where you have
[Guest]: the capacity to do them well? Or should you do things where the need is the greatest?
[Guest]: Because these are very different geographies, actually. And if you do it where you have
[Guest]: the capacity to do them well, typically you end up worsening an already bad historical
[Guest]: deficit of infrastructure in some parts of the state or some parts of the country. So
[Guest]: everybody knows, for example, that Northeast Karnataka has had certain deficits of infrastructure.
[Guest]: So that makes it harder to do some things in that thing. So you can say, well, what's
[Guest]: the point? There isn't enough capacity to roll this out over here. But that's also the
[Guest]: point that the need is greatest over there. So you have to make those choices. And sometimes
[Guest]: the administrators will tell you, sir, you are arranging the donation. You decide. And
[Guest]: you're thinking neither I nor the donor nor the manufacturer wants to decide this. The
[Guest]: public authority to do these things should actually decide. But the public authority
[Guest]: is telling you, you decide. Because the public authority has its own challenges in coming
[Guest]: to the right decision. I mean, like I said, I don't want to keep getting into the nitty
[Guest]: gritty of this too much because there are these kinds of realities that can go on endlessly.
[Guest]: So in one case, for example, we bought some equipment without some regulator that is needed
[Guest]: to run that damn equipment. Unfortunately, the procurement process from the donor to
[Guest]: buy that thing exhausted the money that was available to buy the thing. The guy on the
[Guest]: truck, the guy who's doing the dispatch says, parva nahi sir, main isi ko bhi isi way bil
[Guest]: mein a tax karke, I will send it to you. And you can say, well, I don't want to do that.
[Guest]: Like we'll raise a new invoice, we'll create the proper record, you create a way bill for
[Guest]: that thing, and then we'll deal with all of these kinds of things. Another set of people
[Guest]: are the guys who need that are saying, why are you mad? This thing is coming, put it
[Guest]: on this thing, get it over here. And then there's another set of people, like one guy
[Guest]: called me and said, sir, you know, people like you, you have the network to be able
[Guest]: to sort of surround yourself with six other people to make these decisions. I'm an accountant
[Guest]: in this processing entity. Six months from now, eight months from now, when people start
[Guest]: to ask questions about how this happened and how that happened, it's very likely that a
[Guest]: very large number of the people who are here representing the need today are not going
[Guest]: to be there at that time. Right? And you have to sometimes tell accountants to spend, I
[Guest]: have told accountants to spend money that they do not have. Okay, I'm giving you that
[Guest]: I know that in their organizations, sort of reserves against the ledger that we have created,
[Guest]: there isn't enough money to actually execute the transaction. But I have told them you
[Guest]: do it. The guy will say, how can I do that? There isn't enough inflow for you. He's not
[Guest]: just making a technical point. So I tell him, okay, the inflow will be there, just do it.
[Guest]: You juggle money from somebody else's account in your own organization, use it for now,
[Guest]: we will put it back. He says, I have no authority from my boss to do that. I said, yeah, but
[Guest]: there are two kinds of authority. Right? You first decide whether this is true, whether
[Guest]: this can be pulled off, whether more money can be raised to cover the thing for a little
[Guest]: while. And if the answer to that is yes, you have to first decide whether you feel comfortable
[Guest]: doing that. Whether your boss feels comfortable, we'll come to that. Whether your boss is given
[Guest]: the authority, we'll come to that. But first, do you feel comfortable doing that based on
[Guest]: what you know about the cash flow itself? It just goes on and on and on.
[Amit Varma]: I want to sort of continue on the data line, but on a separate this thing where, what is
[Amit Varma]: the flow of discovery where you figure out what actual needs are, and the nuances of
[Amit Varma]: those needs, so that you can fulfill them, for example, or at the very basic level, you
[Amit Varma]: might know that these people need oxygen. And therefore, you're the obvious solution
[Amit Varma]: for a donor will be by oxygen plants. But then the question is that you have oxygen
[Amit Varma]: plants, how do you set them up? What are the processes? Then the question and I read that
[Amit Varma]: this is a problem somewhere that there is actually excess oxygen in some places, but
[Amit Varma]: the scarcity is of cylinders. And why are cylinders not being manufactured because of
[Amit Varma]: people who manufacture the cylinders are not being able to run the factories because the
[Amit Varma]: government has said oxygen is only for medical use. It's not for manufacturing this stuff.
[Amit Varma]: And it goes round and round. Now, my thing is that therefore, there is a danger that
[Amit Varma]: in this process, there is a lot of wastage in terms of effort and resources. One is there
[Amit Varma]: a way of codifying this developing knowledge as it, you know, forms so that you are able
[Amit Varma]: to direct resources more and more sharply and more and more usefully as time goes by.
[Amit Varma]: And is there then on the part of some donors or some people who are in this, just the desire
[Amit Varma]: to do something because they want to do something. And solving the problem actually requires
[Amit Varma]: a kind of a deeper application in this sense of kind of give me a sense of the practical
[Amit Varma]: flow of discovery. If you have any example to share where you go down one rabbit hole
[Amit Varma]: and all these nuances crop up, that would be great and sort of understanding at a practical
[Guest]: level what it involves. So, I have a sheet of requirements from every
[Guest]: district from the government officially. So, this is what is needed. In some cases, it
[Guest]: has come from the secretariat inside the government. In some cases, it comes from directly from
[Amit Varma]: the district. You are saying Karnataka or India?
[Guest]: Karnataka. Karnataka for now. We have this from some other districts as well outside
[Guest]: Karnataka as well. But inside Karnataka, we have this for every district, right? And also
[Guest]: there is a system of continuous contact with the leadership of the response effort in Karnataka,
[Guest]: the senior secretaries who are in charge of various things. You have to keep in touch
[Guest]: with them all the time and let them guide you a little bit about what they are hearing
[Guest]: in their system, right? But that cannot be the only source of information because that
[Guest]: hearing channel itself has its own deficits. So, what you do is you also create other channels
[Guest]: of information from your external sources and you also feed that back into the government
[Guest]: to say now you are in effect a floating system of information providers to the government.
[Guest]: And sometimes those sheets of paper that the government generates may even be benefited
[Guest]: by the information that you have given because you actually know the thing that needs to
[Guest]: be done. Many people on the ground in the administrative space do not know what is actually
[Guest]: needed in each of the facilities. You actually need somebody who has done hospital administration
[Guest]: to crack that. But in many of the smaller places, no, there isn't anybody to make this
[Guest]: assessment at all. So, there are three pieces of it. One is the official record that comes
[Guest]: out. You try to influence the official record by giving it input about what you are seeing
[Guest]: on the ground so that it improves. The second is there are certain things that anyway nothing
[Guest]: is being delivered only by the official machinery. Whether you want oxygen cylinders or concentrators
[Guest]: or ventilators or ICU beds or whatever, we do not have a situation where all of this
[Guest]: is being delivered only by the government. Some of it is being delivered by the government,
[Guest]: some of it is delivered by the private sector. Some ad hoc arrangements are going on for
[Guest]: all of that stuff. So, effectively, you are running a parallel channel. In fact, if you
[Guest]: are smart, you should tell the government what you propose to do. And if you tell the
[Guest]: government what you propose to do, they can write that down and say, okay, this piece
[Guest]: will be done by so-and-so, that piece will be done by so-and-so. And they can sort of
[Guest]: factor all of that into it. So, it is absolutely essential number one to have continuous contact
[Guest]: with the government to do this kind of thing. Second, you have to look for complementarity.
[Guest]: That is, some devices only work if one or two other things are also there in that person.
[Guest]: But the needs documents are not always written up in that way. The needs document also in
[Guest]: some cases, I haven't seen this much in Karnataka, but I've seen this elsewhere. The needs document
[Guest]: will tell you what they want. They don't tell you what they have. And if they don't tell
[Guest]: you what they have, you have no way of knowing whether the thing that they want is going
[Guest]: to work because it needs one more thing. And that thing is not on this list. So, you don't
[Guest]: know whether you should add that to that list or not. So, what you do, this is where that
[Guest]: verifiable needs thing comes in. You call the guy and say, I noticed that your list
[Guest]: has A, B, and C, but A will not work without D. Do you have D? So, you have to convert
[Guest]: need into verifiable need. And you have to do that whether you are the government or
[Guest]: whether you are the outside channel kind of thing. So, what you try to do again and again
[Guest]: and again is convert need into verifiable need and keep complete transparency between
[Guest]: what you know and what you are letting the government know because that's the best chance
[Guest]: of doing this.
[Guest]: There's another kind of problem. Some donors will say, we want a request letter from the
[Guest]: government. I don't mind saying this, but you can say to the government, please sign
[Guest]: this letter. And the government also, I am sure is getting dozens of such letters, not
[Guest]: just from the donors that are known to me, but many others that are known to me because
[Guest]: everybody wants to do CYA, right? I did this because the government asked me to do it.
[Guest]: It's not that I did it without any sanction for doing it. But one, the process of getting
[Guest]: that letter itself slows down the thing. In some places, you have really good connects,
[Guest]: you can do it fast. But in a very large number of cases, you can't even do that quickly.
[Guest]: The second thing is, in many cases, even if they gave you that letter, they don't actually
[Guest]: know that what they're saying in that letter is true. They're also going on faith, right?
[Guest]: So now you have to craft the language of that letter so that it includes some ambiguity.
[Guest]: The third thing is, it's kind of odd and I've seen this in some cases, where you need something
[Guest]: from me, okay? I come to you and say, here, take it. But for a variety of reasons, on
[Guest]: the official record, you cannot say, I need this. Instead, you say, well, I'm doing whatever
[Guest]: I can at full tilt to make all the things possible that I can, but we recognize that
[Guest]: this is inadequate. We would therefore be willing to accept support from you, okay?
[Guest]: This is what the letter will say in the end, right? And the donor will come back and say,
[Guest]: yeh kya utha hai? Right? And so you have to talk to the donor and say, what is your problem?
[Guest]: Just that's the line number three, shut the fuck up and do it, right? You have to say
[Guest]: that six times a day, I'm telling you, and I've not even told you the worst of it. There
[Guest]: are things I can't tell you. That's just life. You have to tell people again and again and
[Guest]: again, just do it, yeah? Right? Don't ask so many questions. And of course, I recognize
[Guest]: the questions that you are asking add health. But you have the luxury of discounting the
[Guest]: fact that people are dying. And the reason you have that luxury is that you are not standing
[Guest]: on this side of that problem. If you're standing on this side of the problem, even you would
[Guest]: sign it, I know that. But if you're going to stand on that side of the problem, at least
[Guest]: do the thing that you can, as fast as the guys want you to do it on this side of the
[Guest]: problem, whether it's coming from government or not, whether it's coming from the private
[Guest]: sector or whether it's the gray areas or not.
[Guest]: If you cannot act fast enough to enable the relief effort to go really quickly, you simply
[Guest]: cannot be adding value. And a lot of people in institutional spaces especially simply
[Guest]: don't get that. Or they get it and they say, yeah, but what, six months from now you won't
[Guest]: be around and people will be asking me questions in my organization. Well, that's true, but
[Guest]: that's your moral choice. Imagine I'm having the moral choice of deciding who lives and
[Guest]: who dies. And you're saying that you don't want to deal with the choice of having to
[Guest]: explain to your boss why you spent money without the right authorization.
[Guest]: And so you have to sort of educate the guy that, come on, if some other one set of people
[Guest]: are taking risks that are far greater than this, why can't you take three risks like
[Guest]: this? Some will, very few will. That's the sad part. Very few will.
[Amit Varma]: So to whatever extent you can, tell me a little bit about the kind of relief work you guys
[Amit Varma]: have been doing. Like one thing I noticed randomly on Twitter was where you were getting
[Amit Varma]: oxygen cylinders supplied to someplace in Karnataka and Ruben in Bombay had managed
[Amit Varma]: to organize for that. And when the trucks were flagged off, he tweeted the photographs
[Amit Varma]: and you know that this is going from this place to that place. And I assume that that's
[Amit Varma]: just one minor detail among the things that you do. So to whatever extent you can without
[Amit Varma]: giving any details that you don't want to give, tell me about the kind of things that
[Amit Varma]: you did and also tell me about how that fructified. Like I suppose at this moment, let's say you
[Amit Varma]: do X, Y, Z, but you know, when you get into relief, it's a bouquet of options you can
[Amit Varma]: do anywhere from A to Z, but eventually you narrow down to X, Y, Z, and you say that these
[Amit Varma]: are the places where we are most useful because obviously there are resources of time, attention,
[Amit Varma]: money, all of those things. So it'd be great if you can give me some insight.
[Guest]: There's also geography. You're sourcing the resource from a certain direction.
[Guest]: Yeah, yeah, yeah.
[Guest]: Okay, so you can get it to places that are closer to that direction. So if you're sourcing
[Guest]: it from Maharashtra, you can get it into North Karnataka faster. If you're sourcing it from
[Guest]: Tamil Nadu, you can get it into South Karnataka faster. There's that also, which is a limit.
[Guest]: So in the case of the stuff that happened with, you know, this, that Ruben did, so we
[Guest]: couldn't really find the guy, I mean, who said he could make these cylinders. And so
[Guest]: what Ruben did is sort of, it's a useful kind of example, right? So you're trying to buy
[Guest]: something. Some guy says he can sell it, right? So you have no idea whether he can sell it
[Guest]: or not, whether he's even legit or not. So the first thing you have to do is like, okay,
[Guest]: talk to the guy on the phone, try to see what he tells you and all that. Then you say, okay,
[Guest]: I have some sense of it. Then you say, okay, I'm going to go there and take a look because
[Guest]: that's the only way to be sure. Then Ruben went to see one guy, right? Like that. The
[Guest]: place he went to see him was somewhere in the middle of Dharavi, right? And Ruben's
[Guest]: thinking, even if the guy's here, I hope the facility where he's making the damn things
[Guest]: isn't here in some way, because this requires a proper setup to make all of these kinds
[Guest]: of things. You're making, you know, concentrators, oxygen cylinders, things that don't really
[Guest]: get put together in, it's not like making shirts in your house for the textile industry.
[Guest]: So he goes there, and then obviously he can't find the place. There's so many by-lanes and
[Guest]: lanes inside the place that he's like totally, and Ruben actually knows those places well,
[Guest]: right? He can't find the place, imagine. And then he goes and says, okay, I'll get a cop.
[Guest]: And there's also a little bit of a concern. You're just kind of going around looking for
[Guest]: some random guy. You're not from there. So he took one cop and he went inside and he
[Guest]: goes, somehow he dug out the guy, right? And that guy's, you know, he just went all this
[Guest]: turn left here, turn right there and finally found the guy. Then it turns out that guy's
[Guest]: facility is in Navi Mumbai. Then we say, okay, what we came to check was not you. We came
[Guest]: to check whether you could actually make the damn thing. So now we are going to Navi Mumbai.
[Guest]: And the guy will say, you see the grey areas, right? So in some way you have to say, I want
[Guest]: to see this thing. This is the only way to get it done quickly. Just do the damn thing
[Guest]: quickly. People are helping. You also very well help. And then you go there, he has a
[Guest]: nice facility, he's got some seven things done and all of that. So you sort of work
[Guest]: with that process and get good. But he's not done this in scale. He's never needed to do
[Guest]: this in scale. And his sourcing for actually doing this is weak. So you've got to find
[Guest]: out who are all the guys who are part of his sourcing. And you've got to figure out whether
[Guest]: you can do something to enable that sourcing to work properly. Three of those guys will
[Guest]: demand something. So many guys will say, I want to under-invoice you. Lots of guys have
[Guest]: said, I want to under-invoice you. Because there are lots of problems out there. The
[Guest]: government put a cap on some things. You know, the cap, the price cap on some things. So
[Guest]: some people get worried. They say, well, you know what, I want to under-invoice you because
[Guest]: there's a price cap on this thing. But in the market, there are only two choices. The
[Guest]: price caps have actually created a problem. The price cap creates a situation in which
[Guest]: the seller says, I have to either under-invoice you and you pay the rest in cash or bugger
[Guest]: off. I don't even want to sell to you. So your choices are not getting it or getting
[Guest]: into a legal tangle. You have to resolve that choice if you want the thing, right? There
[Guest]: is no easy way to resolve that choice, right? He will say, okay, sir, I do this, I do that,
[Guest]: some nonsense, he will say and do something. And then you have to say to the government,
[Guest]: please remove this price cap or shift the effective date for this price cap. The states
[Guest]: in the center have very different positions on some of these kinds of things. It's all
[Guest]: one big mess out there. And because policy is a mess, action can never be, there are
[Guest]: contradictory policies out there. There is simply no way to follow all the policies.
[Guest]: Give me an example.
[Guest]: Like they will say only such and such a person can do this, right? In the manufacturing,
[Guest]: like oxygen. So only such and such a person can import something. That person will have
[Guest]: already imported it. After he's imported it, they will say only such and such a person
[Guest]: can transport it. But the guy who has sort of imported it doesn't have that actual relationship.
[Guest]: He's just using his import-export license to carry out an activity that he has never
[Guest]: previously carried out, right? So somehow you have to figure out how to transfer the
[Guest]: responsibility for the movement of the thing inside the country to a guy who is not the
[Guest]: guy who imported it into the country. There's lots of paperwork. It can be done, but there's
[Guest]: lots of paperwork and it'll take time, right? But the thing is needed now. If you are going
[Guest]: to do it after seven days, what's the point? The thing is needed now. And sometimes you
[Guest]: have various, you know, the superintendent of police will say, we need this now, right?
[Guest]: He has to take that call as to whether to use it now or wait for the paperwork. So what
[Guest]: you do is you keep the administration informed. This has to be done, right? It has been done
[Guest]: with your knowledge. You even document that it has been done with their knowledge, but
[Guest]: you do it. So what I would say is there is no good way to tackle the pandemic because
[Guest]: many things that are needed to tackle the pandemic are not possible to do under the
[Guest]: current legal framework at all. And until there is a more liberal framework that says,
[Guest]: and you know what will happen under emergency provisions, this framework doesn't actually
[Guest]: become more liberal. It becomes more, you know what I mean, centralized.
[Guest]: More restrictions, more rules.
[Guest]: So yeah, the emergency should mean you can do more things that were not previously possible.
[Guest]: But in an emergency, you'll actually say, we are not going to allow seven other things.
[Guest]: We are going to allow only three things that we think are necessary to solve the problem.
[Guest]: But if those three things do not form a complete set of what is needed to solve the problem,
[Guest]: and a fourth thing is needed, because of the emergency power, you can't solve the problem
[Guest]: until you sort of do the fourth thing anyway, whether there is a legal provision for it
[Guest]: or not. So a lot of people are dealing with that dilemma. There are not enough provisions
[Guest]: in law that understand the situation on the ground and enable it.
[Amit Varma]: No, in fact, this is worth pointing out because this, to a large extent, is dead by bureaucracy
[Amit Varma]: because every delay literally costs you lives. And the point is that you see the consequences
[Amit Varma]: now starkly, where you can say that, okay, this law conflicts with this law, or this
[Amit Varma]: particular law doesn't allow this action to be taken, and therefore lives will be lost.
[Amit Varma]: But the point is, this whole framework of, you know, the center controlling everything
[Amit Varma]: and all this red tapism and rent seeking has been with us for over 70 years and has hobbled
[Amit Varma]: the nation. In fact, I would argue has probably cost many multiples of lives and COVID can
[Amit Varma]: happen in all kinds of unseen ways in a slow drip, drip, drip kind of way where you are
[Amit Varma]: just not letting society solve its own problems. I keep saying that COVID-19 has made the dysfunctional
[Amit Varma]: state stark. Earlier we were in denial of it. It's shown us how dysfunctional it is
[Amit Varma]: in a similar sense. It's shown us how evil this kind of bureaucracy is. You know that
[Amit Varma]: of course it is resulting in lives lost now. But the costs have been immense anyway over
[Amit Varma]: the last seven and a half decades, and no one's done anything about it. But I'm sorry,
[Amit Varma]: so that that rant aside, what would you say are, you know, during this period in sort
[Amit Varma]: of the things that you've done in the areas that you worked in? What are kind of your
[Amit Varma]: big learnings? Like, if you were to speak to the Ashwin Mahesh of say, before the second
[Amit Varma]: wave began, maybe the Ashwin Mahesh of February, what quick learnings would you give him so
[Amit Varma]: that he doesn't have to learn them the hard way?
[Guest]: I think we should have put together the capacity to keep ourselves informed earlier. And we
[Guest]: should have put together that capacity to keep informed, not only in the government,
[Guest]: but outside the government, which is really the thing that is finally starting to happen.
[Guest]: I think as long as the government is the only one that knows something, it's not really
[Guest]: known. You know, for something to be known in a meaningful way, it has to be known across
[Guest]: state market and society. If it is known only to one of them, it's not a useful way of knowing
[Guest]: anything to tackle a problem. But if you look at government policy, government policy is
[Guest]: based on the idea that it's better for the people to be terrified in ignorance than for
[Guest]: them to be terrified in an informed way. Right? So there's this thing called the Communicable
[Guest]: Diseases Act. I don't know if you know that. The Communicable Diseases Act sort of has
[Guest]: certain provisions, which, you know, if you properly implement them, if you go to a hospital
[Guest]: and say, check me out for dengue, check me out for chikungunya, and all of that stuff,
[Guest]: they'll say, haan tk, we'll figure it out and go home. Right? And they're not, the hospital
[Guest]: that actually knows that you have dengue or chikungunya is not in a position to tell you
[Guest]: that. I'm giving you an example, this particular provision, I'm giving you an example from
[Guest]: some two, three years ago, certainly. So there is one National Institute of Virology, only
[Guest]: this National Institute of Virology can tell whether something is reliably true. And conceptually
[Guest]: there's nothing wrong with that. You want these things to be done by somebody who has
[Guest]: the actual capability to do that. But all of these things were set up at a time when
[Guest]: state capacity was much higher than private capacity. 1950s, 1960s, whatever. But today
[Guest]: state capacity is nowhere near private capacity. So what ends up happening, the guy in the
[Guest]: hospital will tell you, you have chikungunya, okay, and therefore you should be doing A,
[Guest]: B, C, D, E, but I didn't tell you that. Wait for your report. So there's a lot of stuff
[Guest]: that is told orally, which is very different from what is told on paper. Now there are
[Guest]: two kinds of problems. One is that you start to do stuff before you got that official thing,
[Guest]: which you really should not have known. So all the doctors and the pharmacists who cooperate
[Guest]: with you in doing that stuff are actually breaking the law. But if you want to be cured,
[Guest]: that's the only way to do it, right? Now there's another kind of problem. The Institute of
[Guest]: Virology might come back and say you don't have chikungunya. And meanwhile for three
[Guest]: days you've been taking chikungunya medicine, whatever that medicine is, right? So you've
[Guest]: got another kind of moral paradox, right? If you tell the guy, he has a chance of getting
[Guest]: better. But even as you tell the guy, you have no way of knowing that the thing that
[Guest]: you are telling the guy is what the official paperwork is going to say even later. So what's
[Guest]: the solution? There's no solution. That's all it is. It is a set of rules for which
[Guest]: there is no solution because they contradict each other.
[Amit Varma]: Okay, I can't, this is causing severe dissonance. I can't kind of wrap my head around this.
[Amit Varma]: So tell me, part of it, of course, is that you coordinate with donors, you coordinate
[Amit Varma]: with volunteers, you get all of it together. But a significant part of it is coordinating
[Amit Varma]: with the state. Sometimes it's understanding what their needs are. And sometimes it is
[Amit Varma]: kind of getting these workarounds. So now, one, this interface with government, how does
[Amit Varma]: it work in the short term? Does it become more responsive and so on? And two, is there
[Amit Varma]: a chance through this of solving any of the longer term structural problems? Because that
[Amit Varma]: broader disaster is still with us, right?
[Guest]: Yes, there is. Look, I think one good thing that has happened in many state governments
[Guest]: is that because of the scale of the problem, they have moved fairly competent people into
[Guest]: the particular parts of government that deal with this problem. You understand, you can't
[Guest]: take the guy who was underperforming for the last 20 years in his career anyway, and give
[Guest]: him any job in this chain of command, because then that's it. That's pretty much, he is
[Guest]: the pandemic at that point, right? So you can't do that. So most governments have figured
[Guest]: out, if I do that, then these things are going to blow up in my face anyway. So I might as
[Guest]: well start to put people in the chain of command who I know at least will do the job with a
[Guest]: fair amount of integrity and a fair amount of industriousness about just moving on the
[Guest]: thing.
[Guest]: And that's one of the good things, that the health departments throughout the country
[Guest]: have reasonably responded to the whole thing by migrating their officials, the stronger
[Guest]: officials to the health-related focus. That's one part of it. But I don't know if you can
[Guest]: count on that to be permanent, because it's quite likely that they form only a one-third
[Guest]: subset of the total thing. Many of these people are in transferable jobs anyway. So at some
[Guest]: point that could dissipate again.
[Guest]: Somebody told me a couple of days ago, the government does not successively appoint good
[Guest]: officers to the same position, right? So basically, at the very least, if someone is good now,
[Guest]: you can sort of reasonably be sure the next person is not going to be asked. I don't know.
[Guest]: All that is statistical at some level. But what I'm trying to say is the government interface
[Guest]: works like this. You have to help. They have to believe that you are there only to help
[Guest]: and that there is no other reason that you are there. And that you have to help them
[Guest]: in a way that works with their system. Even if their system is not the way you would like
[Guest]: to help, or even if you believe that this is not the way to help, you have to at least
[Guest]: help them make it work inside their system in a way that this is the way that it is being
[Guest]: organized.
[Guest]: Because if you don't do that, so for example, let's say you want to represent something
[Guest]: to the government of Kerala, just to pick one random state, and say, I would like this.
[Guest]: Even if a private person who is playing a supporting role with the government of Kerala
[Guest]: were to go to the government and say, okay, this is a good thing, you should do it, you
[Guest]: should help, let Amit do this kind of thing, that government will come back and say, okay,
[Guest]: based on the authority or the influence that guy has, the government will say yes, not
[Guest]: because anything that you say is convincing enough to, they have no capacity to figure
[Guest]: that out in the short run anyway.
[Guest]: So somebody is saying sign here, right? So the government of any state has to sign because
[Guest]: somebody is saying sign here, number one, and not because anything that is said on that
[Guest]: piece of paper is true. But more importantly, they also need to be able to represent that
[Guest]: with sufficient ambiguity. So they recraft the language of what you are asking in a way
[Guest]: that makes it look like, Amit, you're being allowed to help me, right? There are health
[Guest]: secretaries around the country who have told me, okay, okay, you can go ahead. And it's
[Guest]: at the tip of my tongue to say, what do you mean you can go ahead? I'm trying to help
[Guest]: you, right? And all your body language says you are giving me permission. If it was not
[Guest]: for the fact that behind you, there are millions of people who actually need this help, I would
[Guest]: have told you to just get lost and say there are enough people that want my help and will
[Guest]: take it with grace.
[Guest]: And the people that are volunteering their time to make all of this happen for you, they
[Guest]: don't deserve to hear this body language or actual words from you. But you have to think
[Guest]: about the people standing behind that guy. And every instinct in your body says he's
[Guest]: not going to protect them. But, you know, then what do you do? So the government has
[Guest]: also done certain things. The government's in many, not just Canada, many governments
[Guest]: have done, they have various kinds of companies inside the government. Every department has
[Guest]: a company, right? In some departments, this is basically managing director plus peon.
[Guest]: Because the company is a shell thing. And what it means is that there are lots of procurement
[Guest]: in government that can, that needs to be tendered as per the rules. But if you tender to a government
[Guest]: company, you don't need to follow that rule. You can just like award it to them. And they
[Guest]: in turn can structurally award it to a subcontractor without a tender. So I've seen, not just now,
[Guest]: in the past, I mean, some four years ago, I had a situation where somebody was saying
[Guest]: this contract should be given to whatever some, some, I'm going to say, Connecticut
[Guest]: Road Development Corporation or some such organization. So I said, okay, I was on some
[Guest]: committee at that time. And I said, in my judgment, this organization cannot do what
[Guest]: they're saying it's proposing to do. I would like to see their presentation on what it
[Guest]: is. So they scheduled a presentation. And some guy from one of the multinational companies
[Guest]: came to make that presentation. So I asked him, what company are you from? I mean, you
[Guest]: don't sound like the kind of guy that would work for KRDL in any case. And he said, no,
[Guest]: I'm from whatever.
[Guest]: Big company. Big private company.
[Guest]: Big Korean company. So I said, what are you doing here? He said, no, no, we are the subcontractors
[Guest]: who will be executing it. I said, do you realize the contract itself has not been awarded?
[Guest]: This notion of a government company as an internal capacity building organization is
[Guest]: a dodge. It doesn't have anything like the kind of capacity for that service that exists
[Amit Varma]: in the private sector.
[Amit Varma]: But is it kind of then a necessary jugaad to get past their own red tape?
[Guest]: No, it is not a necessary jugaad to get past their own red tape. If they want, they can
[Guest]: cut the red tape.
[Amit Varma]: But they won't do that, because that diminishes their power.
[Guest]: So it is then not a necessary jugaad. It is a jugaad, but it is not a necessary jugaad.
[Guest]: That's what I'm trying to say. So every time you ask this, you know, bad things, I'm always
[Guest]: saying, so there's one more thing in government, which is useful. Among the senior bureaucracies,
[Guest]: there's a lot of people who are married to other senior bureaucrats. That's actually
[Guest]: a useful thing. You know what I mean? Because if you have an ally, you have actually two
[Guest]: allies in getting something done. And often they're posted in slightly different things.
[Guest]: So actually, you can get into some complementarity as well. And the government does one thing.
[Guest]: I think the government does make an effort to post you together in the same job. I mean,
[Guest]: you can go and ask, even if the government doesn't, you can sort of, you know, put in
[Guest]: a request. And if you know where to put the request in, it'll be met. And all of those
[Guest]: kinds of things are true.
[Guest]: And therefore, in a field operation, like a relief operation, that's very useful. Because
[Guest]: now you've got two people who can chase this stuff, right? And I've even, I had a situation
[Guest]: some years ago, I'm not going to say who, in which somebody told me, either I or my
[Guest]: spouse will become chief secretary three years from now, four years from now. You know, just
[Guest]: you can figure out, if you look at the civil list, you can figure out who's going to become
[Guest]: what. In fact, that system is so harmful, I'll tell you. In institutions like ISRO,
[Guest]: I've seen this in ISRO, where people will look at the likelihood of them getting to
[Guest]: the top one or two jobs based on an internal system of calibrating this. And they will
[Guest]: actually say, I should take the last five years of my life and just go. I go and join
[Guest]: Orbital Sciences Corporation, Lockheed Martin, Raytheon, whatever it is globally. I have
[Guest]: the necessary expertise. I'm not going to make it to the top. I might as well find a
[Guest]: secure retirement.
[Guest]: I feel the system should be relooked at. I think, I know nowadays some state governments
[Guest]: feel it's all right to pick whoever for the top job, especially the chief secretary's
[Guest]: job or the DGP's job, based on one or two eligible persons. I know there are even procedures
[Guest]: for that nowadays. But I think it's actually a fairly deeply rooted system. And the media
[Guest]: actually doesn't even know this well enough. The media will say, for example, Amit Verma
[Guest]: has been promoted to the rank of additional DGP. It's got nothing to do with what Amit
[Guest]: Verma did or did not do. There is a timetable. On that timetable there is an additional DGP.
[Guest]: That's all.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, it's kind of perverse that just by where you finish in the IAS rank and your
[Amit Varma]: year of birth, you can basically predict how far you'll get in the system.
[Guest]: So you have to do like a Malcolm Gladwell kind of thing on that and figure out if there's
[Guest]: a January bias or something like that. But, you know, there might be such stuff. I would
[Guest]: say something else that the civil list does get distorted from time to time because some
[Guest]: people leave to go to the center. If you leave to go to the center, that's another set of
[Guest]: distortion of that stuff. But I think it's important to keep in touch with the senior
[Guest]: bureaucracy in particular, because genuinely they can move mountains inside the system.
[Amit Varma]: Finish your anecdote, by the way, about what this person told you that in three years me
[Guest]: or my spouse will be chief secretary.
[Guest]: Yeah. So the advantage of that is the way that people cooperate with each other is actually
[Guest]: based on some calculus like that. Right. I'm not talking about the political class. I'm
[Guest]: saying the rest of the bureaucracy below them. And there's also the system, right? Bureaucrats
[Guest]: behave a certain way in their 30s, a different way in their 40s, and a different way in their
[Guest]: 50s. And the 30s are fairly uniform. The 40s are fairly uniform. The first half of the
[Guest]: 50s are also fairly uniform. The second half of the 50s really depends on your batch here.
[Guest]: Whether you're going to retire as principal secretary, whether you're going to retire
[Guest]: as additional chief secretary, whether you're going to retire as chief secretary, and whether
[Guest]: you're looking for post retirement continuity in government positions or not. There is a
[Guest]: lot of variability in that last five years. And in some way, I think it's a useful thing
[Guest]: to keep an eye on. Because a very large number of people with good networks are retiring
[Guest]: every year. And among that group, there is a subset whose service to the country even
[Guest]: after their retirement is desirable. But by and large, the government will not appoint
[Guest]: them to any post retirement service if they are useful. I'm being quite blunt about this
[Guest]: thing that you cannot become an election commissioner in this country, for example, if you're actually
[Guest]: going to do anything to reform the commission. The very premise is that you're going to do
[Guest]: exactly what was done in 1971 with half the people. So people get jaded about all of this
[Guest]: stuff and start to say, go away. But I'll tell you one other thing. Many couples are
[Guest]: like that, A or B being chief secretary kind of thing. I mean, Karnataka certainly has
[Guest]: had at least seven, eight officers that I can just recall off the top of my head who
[Guest]: meet that definition. Sometimes one of them will be in the police and the other one will
[Guest]: be in the administrative services. But the thing is, there was one protest rally that
[Guest]: I went to, I'm going to say seven or eight years ago, right? And I met somebody who had
[Guest]: been married to a chief secretary. I mean, he was still married to the chief secretary.
[Guest]: But when his spouse, his wife was in service, she was chief secretary. And I met him at
[Guest]: this sort of protest rally, but something, some local civic issue. And I asked him, what
[Guest]: on earth are you doing here? You know what, you were like a central government secretary,
[Guest]: your wife used to be chief secretary. You shouldn't have to protest here on the street
[Guest]: to do something like this. The street protest is for guys like me and others who really
[Guest]: have to move the system without any authority at all. And he said, that's the cliff that
[Guest]: you are facing in government. That when you're out of it, you're out of it. You're out of
[Guest]: it, you're out of it. That's all it is. There is something that can be done to reform that.
[Guest]: In my judgment, we need to have more officers come into the IAS from the states. You know
[Guest]: what I mean? The unfortunate part is the way state officers get promoted into the IAS is
[Guest]: set up in such a way that it is fairly late in their professional lives that they get
[Guest]: inducted into the IAS. And they do not get what I would consider an age appropriate batch
[Guest]: at that point. You know what I mean? You will get inducted into the IAS when you are 50,
[Guest]: but in batch terms, in grade you will be, or rank you will be roughly where the 42-year-olds
[Guest]: are. So you're never going to end up as one of the really top guys. I've seen that happen
[Guest]: once or twice, but that was for political reasons. But you're not going to end up close
[Guest]: enough. Most, in fact, don't even become additional chief secretaries. They only become principals
[Guest]: secretaries. So I think, but the advantage of the guys inside the state system is that
[Guest]: they have spent long years in the same departments. So they actually know something really well.
[Guest]: That if you go to even a parastate, you go to BMTC or your best type thing in Mumbai,
[Guest]: the guy who is number two in best knows the best inside out. If the guy who's number one
[Guest]: can never know it the way the guy who's number two does, but the guy who was number two can
[Guest]: never become number one in that system. It's theoretically possible, but for all practical
[Guest]: reasons it doesn't happen. So we've set up a system of administration in which these
[Guest]: things that are desirable are actually forbidden in practice. So this is what I meant by saying
[Guest]: that you actually have a set of rules and laws and policies, which forbid good outcomes,
[Guest]: except that they are written in the name of creating good outcomes.
[Amit Varma]: It's so revelatory, all of this sort of discussion of the internal government structure. And
[Amit Varma]: you know what you said about what that gentleman told you when he met you at the protest rally
[Amit Varma]: that you just fall off a cliff when you're no longer in government. And I think one of
[Amit Varma]: the key problems there is government just has too much power. And one question I'm not
[Amit Varma]: going to ask you, because I feel it would be unfair to put you on the spot, is whether
[Amit Varma]: in situations like this, what is a proportion out of 100 to which government is a help and
[Amit Varma]: what is a proportion to which it is a hindrance? Because you work with government, so your
[Amit Varma]: incentives will be tailored towards sort of emphasising the health of the people.
[Guest]: No, no, I'm quite happy to answer that question. I'm quite happy to answer that question.
[Amit Varma]: Go ahead. Okay, go ahead then.
[Guest]: Because there's a certain interesting nuance to it. I'm going to say it's 15% that will
[Guest]: help you. Yeah. Okay. 50% would be hostile. And about 30 odd percent will be all right.
[Guest]: They need the help, but they're not hostile either.
[Amit Varma]: This is about the people. What about the structures of government?
[Guest]: The structure actually has no meaning, because there's a way of doing this. Let's say only
[Guest]: 10%, 15% of the people will be helpful and even, frankly, in any worth keeping in government.
[Guest]: Let me go to the extent of sort of saying something like that. But the thing is, every
[Guest]: officer that you engage with is comfortable with that engagement in a way that assumes
[Guest]: throughout that engagement that he or she is in that 15%. So that's really what it is.
[Unknown]: Therefore, it's not really a big thing to say only 10% of the people are good or 15%
[Guest]: of the people are good. It doesn't really create any, it doesn't burn any bridges, it
[Guest]: doesn't ruffle anybody's feathers. And also, they themselves know it in a way.
[Guest]: But there's a way. And there's another interesting thing about government. Let's say I am an
[Guest]: emcee at an event, and you're one of the panelists. And I want to say to the audience, this is
[Guest]: Amit Verma. He's held 23 jobs in the last 15 years. And therefore, he has a wide range
[Guest]: of experience, rich experience in many different fields. But the audience is going to look
[Guest]: at that and say, what crap. But you can go to any event where a senior public official
[Guest]: is introduced, and I guarantee you that the spread of their postings is referred to and
[Guest]: sort of hailed as a wide and important experience. And that, I think, is actually not because
[Guest]: they, many of them are not even expecting it. Many of them will say this is just something,
[Guest]: they're dismissive of the whole thing, they think this is just procedural. But for some
[Guest]: reason, maybe it's just a hangover from the way power was derived and is exercised today.
[Guest]: For some reason, we have too many people in the audience who are ready to clap before
[Guest]: the batsman has scored. You know what I mean? Our spectators are hailing lots of play and
[Guest]: miss, lots of dog balls, lots of hit on the helmet. But no matter what happens to the
[Guest]: battle, there's a very large part of the spectator group that is cheering. And I actually don't
[Guest]: know why it is, because if you ask me, I don't think the officers expect them to cheer.
[Amit Varma]: No, I mean, it's a religion of government, firstly, and that's a lovely sort of very
[Amit Varma]: illuminative thing you said about only 15% help, but 100% will think they are part of
[Amit Varma]: that 15%. It's like Garrison Keillor's famous Lake Wobegon effect. Garrison Keillor was
[Amit Varma]: a novelist who created this place called Lake Wobegon, where everybody was above average.
[Guest]: And all the children are smart, all the women are good looking. I forgot that phrase that
[Amit Varma]: he used.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah. But the idea is the absurdity of everybody being above average, which you know, and in
[Amit Varma]: fact, surveys have shown that everyone who drives thinks they are an above average driver,
[Amit Varma]: which of course is not possible, right? Because what is even the meaning of average? So Ashwin,
[Amit Varma]: you know, we have another 15 minutes of talking left, and I'm extremely grateful and feeling
[Amit Varma]: a little guilty that I took so much of your time, because I think there are far more important
[Amit Varma]: things you should be doing. So thank you for that. But my final question is really, in
[Amit Varma]: a sense, a two part question, which is a question of where is this going? And I mean this in
[Amit Varma]: two parts. One part is with reference to this immediate COVID-19 crisis, where is all of
[Amit Varma]: this going? You've had a very close look at administration. In fact, one could say that
[Amit Varma]: you've, you know, I think by and large, society solves its own problems, because in India,
[Amit Varma]: especially the state is abdicated. And you've been a part of that. But you've also been
[Amit Varma]: a part of getting the state to work. And you've seen that process close up. So in the immediate
[Amit Varma]: sort of short to medium term, where do you see this going? And my other question is,
[Amit Varma]: in the longer term, what will remain of this? Like, it is true that there are people who
[Amit Varma]: are apathetic who will remain apathetic, but many people have felt connected to others
[Amit Varma]: because of the shared experience of community suffering, and they've come out and they're
[Amit Varma]: helping and all of that. Will that remain? Or will it be back to the old normal after
[Amit Varma]: this is over? You know, how hopeful are you about that? What do you what do you see happening?
[Guest]: So on that last question, there is now a deliberate effort to build those networks emerging from
[Guest]: the relief effort, and create a structure for persistence out of them that can you create
[Guest]: in some effect, a national volunteer organization that is not always it's about being standby
[Guest]: to do relief work, but is active across a spectrum of activity, covering, you know,
[Guest]: poverty, ecology, and maybe the economy. And therefore, it has many, many tentacles from
[Guest]: which you can sort of emerge. And can you even link it to education, not only in the
[Guest]: schools, but even other kinds of education, post, post schooling and post college. So
[Guest]: definitely, there is thinking going on to say, we have to build this organization, the
[Guest]: national, you know, a kind of a national volunteer organization, which I also think has a reasonable
[Guest]: chance of representing or being another symbol of patriotism, even which is to say that there
[Guest]: is another way to wave the flag, and in a way that is inclusive in a way that is progressive
[Guest]: and all of that. And I think that so definitely, that is, as we speak, we're trying to construct
[Guest]: that and see how that can emerge from something like this over time. Number one. Second thing
[Guest]: is, I really believe that officials at different levels, not everybody, but you know, because
[Guest]: especially because of the concentration of the competent that I referred to earlier,
[Guest]: there is a set of officials who will come into contact with very large numbers of people
[Guest]: in civil society, on whom they can count on for in some way to be able to do more things,
[Guest]: no matter where they go in their careers. And that's a useful outcome as well, as far
[Guest]: as the pandemic itself goes. I think almost certainly everybody now believes that wave
[Guest]: three is coming, that it's going to hurt the children disproportionately, and there are
[Guest]: a set of things that need to be done. I feel that the big cities will get to manageable
[Guest]: levels of, when I say manageable, these are all terrible words, because manageable really
[Guest]: in this context means acceptable losses, right? It's almost the language of war. The big cities
[Guest]: will get to acceptable losses in a few weeks. The next set of cities could in some cases
[Guest]: get there faster, but in some cases get there at least a few weeks later, but not much later
[Guest]: than that. The thing that is giving everybody great cause for concern is the rural healthcare
[Guest]: infrastructure, really the third tier of healthcare infrastructure, which historically has been
[Guest]: so weak, has to be nothing more than a referral point, right? You say you've got a problem,
[Guest]: so there's nothing really in your village, so you go to the PHC, which is itself one
[Guest]: out of three villages, right, has a PHC. So then you go to the PHC, the PHC is basically,
[Guest]: you know, I don't know, a pulse thermometer and a few other things. But so, you know,
[Guest]: and maybe it had four people, and three of them had other jobs as well. So now you kind
[Guest]: of, at the most, a referral center. And that also meant that if you had to go to some higher
[Guest]: level of capability in the healthcare infrastructure, you really had to do that at your own cost
[Guest]: and your own whatever. You know, you have to go somewhere, take care of yourself in
[Guest]: another place, blah, blah, blah, all of that stuff, in addition to needing the care. But
[Guest]: now you've got a situation where if you go to that facility, there are a thousand people
[Guest]: like you at that facility. So that facility can reach a degree of self-sufficiency for
[Guest]: the people that it was originally intended to serve. But it is continuing to be overwhelmed
[Guest]: from the people who are from other jurisdictions that should have been served by anybody else.
[Guest]: What historically has been a three-layer system for care, with different levels of healthcare
[Guest]: capacity at each level. So the tertiary hospital needed to have capabilities that the secondary
[Guest]: hospital did not, and the primary health center did not, right? Today, you have a situation
[Guest]: in which the tertiary capability is needed in the village in some cases. And merely referring
[Guest]: the person from the village to the district hospital is inadequate. That hospital is already
[Guest]: swamped with serving the tertiary capacity that it is supposed to take care of. So, you
[Guest]: know, I hate to say this. So far, I've not heard from any of the chatter, any of the
[Guest]: groups looking at this problem, what the solution to this is. There is talk of one thing, which
[Guest]: I find interesting, the idea of a small cluster of ICU beds, 10 beds at a time, 15 beds at
[Guest]: a time that would go into the PHCs itself. And then, you know, some people are optimistic
[Guest]: about telemedicine and teleconsulting and all of those kinds of things. I think it is
[Guest]: possible for an NGO that is sufficiently organized to pull off 10 of this, 15 of this, 20 of
[Guest]: this, whether all of us together can pull off, you know, 4,000 of that, 6,000 of that
[Guest]: in large states. I have my doubts about that. I think we're in for a time of really difficult
[Guest]: choices for a long time. And it's not simply a question of whether people live or die.
[Guest]: Even if they're incapacitated a little. I had a situation reported to me a few days
[Guest]: ago about somebody who, you know, his grandfather or somebody died of COVID. His uncle and aunt
[Guest]: died of COVID. His mother had COVID, did not have COVID, or she had COVID, she went into
[Guest]: the hospital. She recovered from the thing and then the ventilator failed or some, you
[Guest]: know, some bizarre thing. And absolutely horrible, horrible stuff, that if the sum of all these
[Guest]: stories doesn't tell even half of what is going on out there. And that is the scary
[Guest]: part that I think it is only if you get involved that you'll actually know what is going on,
[Guest]: that the media isn't a sufficiently useful source of information now.
[Amit Varma]: So I have an observation for my listeners, really, and a final question for you. And
[Amit Varma]: the observation is this, that I think almost everyone who listens to the show is part of
[Amit Varma]: an English speaking elite. We live in a bubble. Some of us are outside India. Most of us are
[Amit Varma]: inside India, but we are in our bubbles. And we miss the severity of the first wave because
[Amit Varma]: it didn't happen to PLU, it didn't happen to people like us. Like a friend of mine told
[Amit Varma]: me about this seroprevalence study that he had gotten done in Mumbai in December, I don't
[Amit Varma]: know if the results were public, which found that 55% of people in the slums already had
[Amit Varma]: had COVID, but only 11% of the people in the high rises. And one of the reasons that people
[Amit Varma]: like us are noticing the second wave so much is that it has hit us. You know, earlier,
[Amit Varma]: it was unseen because it didn't happen to us because we were safe in lockdown in our
[Amit Varma]: high rises. Now it has hit us, we see it. And now what is going to happen moving forward
[Amit Varma]: is as it recedes from the cities, it will devastate rural India. I mean, the magnitude
[Amit Varma]: of the damage it could do is, my mind just boggles, it's incalculable. And it might again
[Amit Varma]: be unseen to us. And that's my worry. So my final question to you, Ashwin, is this, that
[Amit Varma]: if people listening to this say that I want to get involved, I want to help, but I want
[Amit Varma]: to do it in a practical way. I don't want to be a pest. I don't want to just sort of
[Amit Varma]: be a burden on the system. I actually want to help. What should I do with or without
[Amit Varma]: you? Like, can I, you know, then the question to them would be that, how can I help you,
[Amit Varma]: Ashwin? Or what else can a citizen do? So, you know, two-pronged question.
[Guest]: I want to say one thing in response to what you observed. Certainly, it is true that people
[Guest]: are responding because it is hitting them. I had a conversation with the head of a very
[Guest]: large nonprofit organization, which is used to receiving lots of donations from, you know,
[Guest]: major donors. And he said they are willing to donate more money because their executives
[Guest]: are dying. That's really all it is, right? So there is some of that, that it is hitting
[Guest]: us and therefore it's stirring some, you know, action in that thing. That's actually not
[Guest]: very sustainable. It'll die off fairly quickly. In response to, I mean, die off is the wrong
[Guest]: word to use, but in response to what you asked, I think there is a very simple thing. No matter
[Guest]: where you live, there is a system of public health care for the area that you live in.
[Guest]: If you are not able to do anything more than this, become aware of what that public health
[Guest]: care facility is able to do and become supportive of it in whatever little way you can. Forget
[Guest]: about, I'm not saying ignore the private thing, but no matter where you go, there's a public
[Guest]: health facility that is supposed to serve you. Figure out how you can support it. If
[Guest]: all you can do is figure out what it needs and surface that, do that. If you're able
[Guest]: to meet some of those needs, either yourself or in collaboration with others, do that.
[Guest]: But I think that if we do not resolve to engage with our public health institutions and infrastructure,
[Guest]: no idea of development that we are thinking about is going to emerge. Keep in mind that
[Guest]: in developed economies, developed societies, nearly a third of all public expenditure is
[Guest]: on health. So really government equal to health for a lot of developed societies. If you say
[Guest]: that the majority of the truth is the truth, then health is government. But if you really
[Guest]: care about better governance, there's a very simple way. Go to your local PHC and improve
[Guest]: it. You'll get the better governance that you're looking for.
[Amit Varma]: Ashwin, more power to you. And thanks so much for your time and your insights.
[Guest]: Good luck. I enjoy being on this program. I think it's adding a lot of value to people.
[Guest]: I've said that before as well. And I'm thankful for what you're doing as well.
[Amit Varma]: If you enjoyed listening to this episode, do check out the show notes for a deeper dive.
[Amit Varma]: You can follow Ashwin on Twitter at Ashwin Mahesh, one word. You can follow me at Amit
[Amit Varma]: Varma, A-M-I-T-V-A-R-M-A. You can browse past episodes of The Scene and the Unseen at sceneunseen.in.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you for listening.